Stab~lity of Highly Inclined Boreholes 

B.S. Aadnoy,  SPE,  Rogaland  Regional  C. 
M.E. Chenevert, SPE,  U.  of Texas 

Summary.  Hole  inclination  produces  alterations  in  the  stress  state  around  the  borehole  and  in  the  physical  properties  of the  rock. 
Depending  on  specific  conditions,  such  effects  may  lead  to  collapse  of the  borehole  or a  reduction  in  the  fracture-initiation 
pressure.  This  paper  shows  how  to  determine  such  effects  through  the  application  of stress  analysis  and  rock  mechanics. 

Introduction 
Stability of deviated boreholes is an important subject.  Such prob(cid:173)
lems as lost circulation may create hazardous conditions, while bore(cid:173)
hole collapse often results in enlargement of the borehole, causing 
numerous problems-e.g., poor cement displacement.  The prob(cid:173)
lems  may  exist  in  the  producing phase of a  borehole,  as  well  as 
when  drilling. 

This  paper is  based  on  a  linear elastic  and  isotropic  model  for 
stresses around the wellbore, with the aim of trying to understand 
the general behavior of inclined boreholes. The model is first used 
to study the two fracturing mechanisms.  It was found that borehole 
collapse is caused mainly by shear but also by tensile failure, while 
fracturing of the wellbore is caused predominantly by tensile failure. 
Furthermore,  when  the  wellbore  is  rotated  from  a  vertical  to  a 
horizontal position, the analysis shows that the borehole becomes 
more sensitive toward collapse.  For laminated sedimentary rocks, 
a  weakness  plane  may  subject  the  well  toward  collapse  for  hole 
angles  between  10  and  40°  [0.17  and  0.7  rad].  In  tectonically 
stressed areas, the collapse stability may be improVed by choosing 
the proper geographic direction  for  the  borehole.  The  fracturing 
gradient generally decreases  with  increased borehole inclination. 
A simple formula is included to estimate the fracture initiation gra(cid:173)
dients  for  inclined  holes  if data  for  a  vertical  hole  are  known. 

The input data to the analysis are composite curves from the U.S. 
gulf coast area.  We believe, however, that the results obtained may 
be  applicable  to  any  continuous  depositional  basin. 

Borehole stability is currently being given considerable attention 
in  Norway.  With a number of offshore fields  under planning and 
development,  a substantial saving in expenditures is envisioned if 
a field  can  be drained from  three platforms  instead of four.  This 
can  be  realized  by  the  application  of  extended-reach  drilling 
methods.  An increased borehole angle, however,  brings about new 
problems.  Cuttings  transport,  casing  setting  and  cementing,  and 
drill string friction are examples of difficulties encountered in highly 
deviated  boreholes.  Also,  the  formation  fracturing  gradient  de(cid:173)
creases with increased borehole angle. With an increased application 
of oil-based  muds,  the  prediction of the  fracturing  gradients  be(cid:173)
comes more important than ever. Here, fracturing must be avoided 
during the drilling phase, and the problem is to determine the max(cid:173)
imum  values  for  the  formation-integrity  tests. 

Methods  to  predict  fracturing  gradients  are  typically  based  on 
empirical  correlations between  fracturing  data,  overburden data, 
and  depth.  Different methods of this  nature are given  in  Refs.  1 
through 7.  Daines' 7  method in particular has been successfully ap(cid:173)
plied in Norway by several oil companies. All these methods work 
for vertical wells.  Only Bradley 8  studied the effect of borehole in(cid:173)
clination on the fracturing gradient. The basic difference is that while 
the former (Refs.  1 through 7) used empirical correlations, Bradley 
used equations for the stresses around the borehole.  In this paper, 
we will continue Bradley's approach because the study of stresses 
around the borehole also gives us a tool to study the failure mech(cid:173)
anisms. 

Before proceeding further,  we will define some of the assumptions 
used  here.  In addition to  using  a linear-elastic and  isotropic rock 
model for plane-strain conditions, we assume formations where all 

Copyright  1987 Society  of Petroleum  Engineers 

364 

in-situ stresses are principal and directed horizontally and vertically, 
respectively.  Generally,  no  information is  available regarding the 
relative  values  of the  two  horizontal  in-situ  stresses,  so  they  are 
assumed equal. The key in the analysis is that when a well is drilled, 
the  rock  surrounding  the  hole  must take  the  load  that  was  previ(cid:173)
ously taken by the removed rock.  As a result, an increase in stress 
around  the  wall  of the  hole,  a  stress  concentration,  is  produced. 
If the  rock  is  not  strong  enough,  the  borehole  will  fail. 

If the borehole pressure is increased too much, fracturing or split(cid:173)

ting of the borehole will occur. Conversely, if the borehole pressure 
is  lowered too  much,  the borehole will collapse because of shear 
failure.  In  this  case,  rock  fragment  will  break  off from  the  wall 
and  fall  into  the  wellbore.  These  situations  are  shown  in  Fig.  1. 
Finally,  note that the given stress equations are valid for an intact 
borehole only.  As  soon as  the borehole  fails,  the  stress  situation 
changes  and  the  equations  are  no  longer  valid. 

, Qualitative Discussion of Mechanisms Causing 
Wellbore Instabilities 
As  stated,  two main types of wellbore-stability  problems occur(cid:173)
fracturing of the well bore at high borehole pressure and borehole 
collapse at low pressure. Wellbore collapse caused by clay swelling 
will  not  be  covered  here. 

Before  we  proceed  further,  note  the  peculiar characteristics of 
rocks.  As  opposed  to  metallic  materials  that  have  high  tensile 
strengths,  rocks will generally be very weak in tension.  Bradley 8 
assumes rocks to have zero tensile strength and uses zero effective 
stress as his criterion for tensile failure.  The reasoning is that rocks 
often fail  along  old cracks or flaws.  Such an assumption  is  often 
also  used  by  others. 

In this paper,  we  argue that the main mechanism causing well(cid:173)

bore failure' when the wellbore is fractured  is tensile failure of the 
rock.  For borehole collapse cases, the failure may be caused partly 
by tensile effects, but will be caused mainly by  shear effects. This 
idea is illustrated in Fig.  2 and will be quantitatively shown later. 
A typical  fracturing  of the  wellbore  in  shallow  wells  (horizontal 
fracture) is shown in Fig. 2a, where the overburden is being lifted. 
The axial  stress,  az'  goes  tensile,  while the  radial  and  tangential 
stresses remain in a compressive state. Shear effects occur between 
(ao,  az)' (ao,  ar), and (a r,  az) because oflarge stress differences. 
These shear stresses will merely aid the fracturing process caused 
by  the axial stress going  tensile.  No  rock pieces  will  be  released 
because both the  shear and  tensile stresses cause the  fractures  to 
go predominantly  radially  outward  from the borehole.  The equa(cid:173)
tions  used  in this  paper are  not  valid for  this  case.  Fig.  2b  illus(cid:173)
trates the fracturing of a deeper well,  where a vertical fracture  is 
produced.  Here, the radial and axial stresses are compressive, while 
the tangential stress,  ao, goes tensile.  Even if a rock piece should 
be released from the borehole wall, the high wellbore pressure would 
keep  it  in  place  in  both  cases. 

A borehole collapse process  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  2c.  This  is  a 
typical  pressure-drawdown problem.  In  this  case,  both  the  axial 
and the tangential effective stresses are compressive, while the radial 
effective  stress goes  tensile.  If linear elasticity  theory  is  applied, 
the failure should occur exactly at the wellbore wall. It is visualized 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

Events Which Occur at 1~~~~ 

High Wellbore Pressures  ~ 

Maximum Shear 

, 
,'tmax 

Vertical 
Fractura 

Radial 
Effective Stress 

Axial 

Effective Stress 

Tangential 
Effective Stress 

Fig.  3-Mohr's circle for collapse case. 

Borehole Enlargement 
orColiapee 

Fig.  1-Typical  borehole problems. 

0.7 

0.6 

mT~I.I''''~ ~. 

, 

/ 

a, 

a, 

a, 

a) 

b) 

\ 
I 
/ 

I 
\ 
, 
a 
\ 
, 
a 

~'~---'" 

, 
a 

.-

c) 

,.-0-. 

Tensile Failure 

Shear 
Failure 

I 
\ 

a, 

, 
I 
,  __ ,// 

~'--"\ 

Tensile 

Fig. 2-Characteristic failures of boreholes: (a) horizontal frac(cid:173)
ture  in  shallow  well,  (b) vertical  fracture  in  deep well,  and 
(c) borehole  collapse  caused  by  shear  with  tensile  radial 
stress. 

that the wellbore sometimes fails in tension around a circumference 
as shown in Fig.  2c. In this case, the presence of radial failure aids 
the shear stresses in releasing pieces of rocks  from the wellbore. 
If the wellbore pressure is  lower than the formation pressure,  the 
flow  of formation  fluids  into the  wellbore  will  wash the  released 
pieces  of rock  into  the  wellbore. 

Haimson and Herrick 9  have recently performed an experimental 
program studying borehole collapse. They conclude that the major 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

Effective Normal Stress, S- Pfm,  psilft 

Fig.  4-von Mises shear-failure diagram. 

breakout  mechanism  is  apparently  tensile  rupture  along  surfaces 
to the borehole wall aided by shear failure  in the radial direction. 
Also,  they conclude that the collapse occurs at the position of the 
borehole that corresponds to the direction of the least in-situ stress 
normal to the axis of the hole. This is fully in line with our analysis. 
Regarding the direction of the shear forces, for a vertical borehole 

under idealized conditions, the radial, tangential, and axial stress(cid:173)
es become principal stresses. This means that no shear forces exist 
along  the  direction of these  stresses.  At  an  angle  with  respect  to 
these  stresses,  however,  shear  forces  will  reach  a  maximum.  A 
Mohr diagram is a convenient way to represent these shear stresses 
and their directions.  Fig.  3 is  a three-dimensional  Mohr diagram 
for the borehole-collapse case. The shear stress reaches a maximum 
at point  Tmax'  This corresponds to an angle of a=45°  [0.79  rad] 
from  the  radial  and  tangential  axes,  and  the  failure  envelope ap(cid:173)
proaches  the  Mohr circle at an  angle  of 30 to  45°  [0.52  to  0.79 
rad].  Spalling of the wellbore often results in concoidal-shaped rock 
fragments.  Closer inspection of these shows that the shear failure 
often starts out at about a 30 to 45°  [0.52- to 0.79-rad]  angle,  as 
previously  defined. 

Shear Failure 
Two obvious  mechanisms  causing borehole failure  are shear and 
tensile  failure.  Many  shear-failure  theories  have  been  proposed 

365 

TABLE  1-EFFECTIVE OCTAHEDRAL SHEAR STRESS AND EFFECTIVE NORMAL STRESS 

AS  FUNCTIONS OF BOREHOLE  ANGLE  AND  WELLBORE  PRESSURE,  FOR 

a x  = a y = 0.80 psi/ft,  a z = 1.0 psllft,  and Pfm = 0.46  psi/ft 

Borehole Angle,  I' 

(degrees) 

o 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 

Effective 

Normal  Stress 

(psilft) 
0.40 
0.41 
0.43 
0.45 
0.48 
0.50 
0.53 
0.55 
0.57 
0.58 

Effective Octahedral  Shear Stress 

(psi/tt) 

Pw  =0.50 psiltt 

P w =0.60 psi/tt 

Pw = 0.70 psi/ft 

0.32 
0.33 
0.37 
0.42 
0.47 
0.52 
0.56 
0.59 
0.60 
0.61 

0.23 
0.25 
0.28 
0.33 
0.38 
0.42 
0.46 
0.49 
0.51 
0.52 

0.15 
0.17 
0.21 
0.25 
0.30 
0.34 
0.37 
0.40 
0.41 
0.42 

throughout the years,  but it is well known that no single theory  is 
satisfactory  for  all  materials.  Shear (compressive) failure  will  be 
discussed first,  using the von Mises "three-principal-stress" criteri(cid:173)
on, then failure will be discussed, using the Mohr-Coulomb "two(cid:173)
principal-stress"  criterion. 

von Mises Yield Condition. One of the most-used failure theories 
is Mohr's hypothesis.  In this hypothesis, however, only the largest 
and  smallest principal stresses affect  failure.  According  to  Brad(cid:173)
ley,8  more  recent  results  have  shown  that  the  intermediate prin(cid:173)
cipal stress affects failure as well. The intermediate principal stress 
is included in stress studies by applying an extended von Mises yield 
criterion. All three principal stresses are taken into account. These 
failure  criteria  are  given  as 

and 

Eq.  la actually  represents  the  second deviatoric  stress  invariant, 
which is then plotted in Fig. 4 vs.  the first normal effective-stress 
invariant (Eq.  Ib).  It is  therefore a model used to express the ex(cid:173)
perimental  data. 

A typical failure envelope for three rocks based on the previous 
criteria is  shown in  Fig.  4.  If the  stress state  of the  rock element 
in question falls below a given rock-failure envelope, the borehole 
is stable with respect to shear. Conversely, a stress state above the 
failure  envelope  means  that  shear failure  has .occurred.  Bradley8 

TABLE 2-EFFECTIVE OCTAHEDRAL SHEAR  STRENGTH 

AND  EFFECTIVE  NORMAL STRESS  FOR  VARIOUS 

ROCKS  UNDER  ELEVATED STRESS CONDITIONS 1o,11 

°1 
(psilft) 

°2 
(psilft) 

°3 
(psi/ft) 

J  ';' 
2 
(psilft) 

S-Pfm 
(psi/tt) 

Atoka Shale 

0.17 
0.20 
0.25 
0.33 
Berea 
0.13 
0.17 
0.18 
0.20 

Wolfcamp 

0.13 
0.17 
0.20 
0.27 

0.17 
0.20 
0.25 
0.33 

0.13 
0.17 
0.18 
0.20 

0.13 
0.17 
0.20 
0.27 

0.83 
0.90 
1.00 
1.17 

0.92 
1.15 
1.26 
1.38 

0.93 
1.0 
1.07 
1.20 

0.38 
0.40 
0.43 
0.48 

0.46 
0.57 
0.62 
0.68 

0.46 
0.48 
0.50 
0.54 

0.39 
0.43 
0.50 
0.61 

0.40 
0.49 
0.54 
0.59 

0.40 
0.44 
0.49 
0.58 

366 

found  that  by  plotting  failure  data  vs.  the  average  mean  normal 
stress,  a  family  of curves  could  be  created. 

With the criteria given in Eq.  I and the equations for stress around 
boreholes,  a  computer program  was  written  to  generate data  for 
various wellbore orientations and rock-strength data.  The equations 
used are given in the Appendix.  First, the in-situ stresses are trans(cid:173)
formed to the direction of the borehole by Eq.  A-3, then the stresses 
at the borehole wall are found with Eq. A-2.  Finally, the principal 
stresses are calculated with Eq. A-4, and the shear and normal stress(cid:173)
es  acting  on  the  rock  are  calculated  with  Eq.  I. 

The horizontal in-situ stresses were held equal and the borehole 
direction  was  rotated  from  vertical  to  horizontal  orientation.  An 
example of the  procedure  follows.  For a  vertical  well  (1'=0°  [0 
rad]),  the following values were assumed:  0T! =01'2 =0.8 psilft [18 
kPa/m],  00 = 1 psi/ft [22.6 kPa/m], Pjm =0.46 psi/ft [10.4 kPa/m], 
0=90°  [1.57  rad]  (see  the  Appendix  for  0max/omin  convention), 
and Pw=0.5 psi/ft [11.3 kPa/m].  These are inserted into Eq.  A-3 
to get:  0x=Oy=0T!' 0zz=oo,  Tyz=Txz=Txy=O.  From Eq.  A-2,  we 
now  obtain  0r=0.5  psilft  [11.3  kPa/m],  0e = 1.1  psilft  [24.9 
kPa/m], 0zz = I psi/ft [22.6 kPa/m], and Tez =0. These in tum were 
used  in  Eq.  A-4  to  find  the  principal  stresses,  which  become 
0,=1.1  psilft  [24.9  kPa/m],  02=1  psi/ft  [22.6  kPa/m],  and 
03 =0.5  psi/ft  [11.3  kPa/m].  Inserting  these  numbers  into  Eq.  1 
we obtain J1' =0.321  psi/ft [7.26 kPa/m] and S-Pfm =0.407 psi/ft 
[9.2 kPa/m].  Repeating this procedure with 1'= 10° [0.17 rad], 20° 
[0.35  rad],  etc.,  in Eq.  A-3, the Pw=O.S-psi/ft [11.3-kPa/m] curve 
of Fig.  4  can  be  constructed  (see  Table  I). 

The  same  procedure  was  followed  for  Pw=0.6 and  0.7  psilft 
[13.6 and  IS.8 kPa/m]; such values are shown in Fig. 4. Note that 
increasing the wellbore pressure lowers the stress state away from 
the three rock-failure curves. This result is in agreement with field 
observations;  increasing  the  mud  weight often produces  hole sta(cid:173)
bility. 

The rock-strength curves shown in  Fig.  4 were developed with 
Eq.  I  and  Llewelyn' s 10  and  Chenevert' s II  rock  properties.  For 
the  purpose of displaying  the effect of hole  angle on the  strength 
gradient of such  rocks,  it  was  assumed  that the  Berea sandstone, 
the Atoka shale, and the Wolfcamp shale all occurred at the same 
depth  (IS,OOO  ft  [4S70  m]).  The  reader  should  be cautioned  not 
to  use  Fig.  4  in  an  all-inclusive  manner,  but  rather  to  analyze  a 
given rock by  its  specific stress conditions as encountered.  Table 
2  provides  a  listing  of rock-strength  conditions  used  in  Fig.  4. 
In  the  case  of the  Berea  sandstone,  the  stress  conditions  were 
below the rock-failure curve for all values of well bore pressure and 
hole  angle.  From this  observation,  it  is  concluded  that  this  rock 
would be stable under all these conditions. For the case of the Atoka 
and  Wolfcamp  shales,  the  results  were  different.  As  shown,  for 
Pw=O.S psilft [l1.3 kPa/m], the Wolfcamp shale became unstable 
at an angle of about 45° [0.79 rad] and the Atoka at about 28° [0.49 
rad].  For  the  higher  wellbore  pressures  of Pw=0.7  psi/ft  [IS.8 
kPa/m],  however,  the  wellbore  was  stable  for  all  angles  and  for 
both  shales. 

The importance of increased wellbore pressure is obvious in Fig. 
4. It should be pointed out that this effect does decrease the occur(cid:173)
rence for shear failure;  however,  it also increases the  occurrence 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

§ 
8 
.... 

03  =  5000 psi 

0 

\ 

0 

0 

~ailure Across Bedding 

--- Failure Along Bedding 

03  =  2500 psi 

°3 

§ 
i 

~ 

'iii 
.z! -CI 
Q.  § 
c 
~ 
I!! en 
Qi :; 

"C 

§ 
Sf 

x  ~.-;--IJ 
/ 

,"",-'-;-

" .. 
,.".  -.,,".,,' 

~ ...... ; .... . 

Case A:  Failure at: e =  0° 

Case B:  Failure at: B =  90° 

Fig.  5-Adaptation of core plug data to a real  borehole. 

for tensile (hydraulic fracturing) failure.  So,  in any given case,  both 
shear and tensile failure must be studied. Tensile failure is discussed 
later  in  this  paper. 

Note that for the application of Eq.  I, maximum von Mises shear 
stress  occurs  in  the  direction  of the  least  in-situ  stress  normal  to 
the borehole axis.  For equal horizontal in-situ stresses,  this maxi(cid:173)
mum  will always be at  the y axis  (8=90°  [1.57  rad]).  (For more 
detail,  see  Ref.  12.) 

An  interesting  conclusion found  in  this  study  is  that increasing 
the  in-situ  stresses  with  increased  depth  does  not  strongly  affect 
the  shear stress.  This means that the  well  is not strongly  sensitive 
to  shear failure  with  increased  depth. 

Mohr-Coulomb Shear-Failure Model. The von Mises yield con(cid:173)
dition,  as  previously  discussed,  takes  the  intermediate  principal 
stress into account.  Now we will attempt to use the Mohr-Coulomb 
shear-failure model to study borehole collapse, which neglects the 
intermediate principal stress but does include the effect of the direc(cid:173)
tional  strengths  of shales: 

T=To+a'  tan  ex . .................................. (2) 

This  model  assumes  that  the total  shearing  resistance  offered  by 
an isotropic material to failure is the sum of the frictional resistance 
to slip along the potential failure plane and  the cohesive strength, 
To'  a'  is  the  effective  normal  stress  on  the  failure  plane  and  tan 
ex  is the coefficient of internal friction.  The shear and effective nor(cid:173)
mal components of the stress acting on a plane inclined at an angle 
ex  with  the  direction  of the  maximum  principal  stress  is 

a'=V2(al +a3)-V2(a,-a3)sin ex-Pjrn  ............... (3a) 

and 

T= V2(al  -a3)cos ex. 

. ............................. (3b) 

The effective principal  stresses are given as  a'k =ak -Pjin' where 
k =  1,2,3, and are usually  used  in  most stress/failure representations 
(see  Eq.  A-5). 

Jaeger13  proposed an extension of the previous theory,  in which 

the effects of the weakness planes are taken into account.  This ap(cid:173)
proach essentially establishes two Mohr-Coulomb envelopes, one 
applying  to  the  material  and  the  other describing  failure  along  a 
weakness  plane. 

Chenevert and  Gatlin 14  measured  different  rocks,  varying  the 

inclination of the bedding plane with respect to the maximum ap(cid:173)
plied  stress  by  use  of "core plugs"  cut  from  slabs  of rock,  and 
arrived at To  and tan  ex  values as a function of bedding-plane orien(cid:173)
tation. To apply shear-failure data from core plugs, however, these 
data  must be  put into the proper context.  It is already  established 
by  Haimson and Herrick 9  that the point of collapse is in the direc(cid:173)
tion  of the  least  in-situ  stress. 

In our case,  the stresses  with equal horizontal in-situ  stress are 
always  in  the direction of the y axis  (8=90°  [1.57  rad]).  Even  if 
the  in-situ  stresses  are equal  for  a  vertical  hole,  the  stress along 
the x  axis  will  gradually  increase toward  the  weight  of the  over(cid:173)
burden  when  the  borehole  is  rotated  toward  horizontal  position. 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

Inclination of Bedding to Specimen Axis, 13 

Fig. 6-Arkansas sandstone data vs. single weakness-plane 
theory. 

---

5000 

Pore Pressure: 9 ppg 

4000 ~ \~e'" 

\,e~6etf> " 

I 
!  3000 
;, 
In 
In 
I! 
a.. 
I a..  2000 
.!! 
'0 
(,) 

Plane of Weakness 

/ 

1000 

0 

0° 

15° 

Green River Shale 

/ 

30° 

60° 
Borehole Inclination,  Y 

45° 

75° 

90° 

Fig. 7 -Collapse pressure vs. borehole inclination at 10,000 ft. 

Fig. 5 shows two elements on the borehole wall subjected to col(cid:173)
lapse.  Actually,  these "slices" are very thin, with  very  little cur(cid:173)
vature.  The tangential (hoop) stress is definitely the largest, followed 
by the axial stress and the radial stress (the borehole pressure). In 
applying the coreplug data, the maximum applied stress corresponds 
to the hoop stress and the confining pressure to the borehole pres(cid:173)
sure.  For our case, with equal horizontal in-situ stresses, the hole 

367 

Or----------------------------, 

5000 

15000 

~OOO~--------~------~--~~----~ 
15000 

10000 

5000 

o 

Pressure, psi 

Fig. a-Collapse pressure vs. depth for Leuders limestone. 

will  fail  as  in  Case B of Fig.  5.  Here  we  see  that  the  directional 
shear strength  comes  into  play.  When  core plugs  are  tested,  the 
bedding plane is oriented at angle {3  with respect to the axially ap(cid:173)
plied  stress.  We  see  that  for  Case  B,  the  angle  {3  corresponds  to 
the  borehole  inclination  -y.  Fig.  5 and  this  part of the  analysis  is 
a  simplified  presentation.  More details  can  be  found  in  Ref.  12. 
In  Fig.  6,  the  rock-yield-strength data are shown as  a function  of 
bedding-plane orientation.  Clearly, the weakness plane is  signifi(cid:173)
cant and  reduces the shear strength of the  rock by  nearly a factor 
of two.  We know  in general that if the angle between the bedding 
plane and the applied axial load is in the range 10° < {3 < 40°  [0.17 
rad < {3 < 0.7 rad], typically a sedimentary rock will exhibit a weak(cid:173)
ness plane (as seen in Fig. 6). It is therefore observed that the most 
sensitive  range of inclination  with respect to borehole collapse is 
10° < -y <40° [0.17 rad <-y<0.7 rad],  because here the rock will 
fail  along  the  bedding  plane. 

Let us for a moment consider a different case, namely a tectoni(cid:173)

cally  stressed  case  where  one of the  horizontal  in-situ  stresses  is 
larger than  the  other.  If this  stress  is  in  the  y  direction,  the  hole 
will  collapse,  as  in  Case  A of Fig.  5.  The interesting  point  here 
is that only one failure envelope applies for all borehole angles (as 
indicated  in  Fig.  5),  and  that  the  weakness  plane  does  not  come 
into play at all.  In other words, inclining the borehole in the direc(cid:173)
tion of the least in-situ stress forces any shear failure that may occur 
to cut across (rather than along)  the bedding planes and therefore 
produces a very stable hole against collapse.  Note that in the above 
analysis,  we  assumed  that  the  hoop  stress  was  a  principal  stress 
(a reasonable assumption). Inspection of Eq. A-4 shows that some 
shear  effects  arise  that  may  adjust  the  direction  of the  principal 
stresses  somewhat.  This  is  neglected  here. 

Eqs.  2 and 3 were coupled with the mathematical model for the 
borehole and then used with Chenevert and Gatlin's 14  directional 
shear data and  Eaton's2  in-situ stresses.  An example case is shown 
in Fig. 7. This curve shows the effect of hole angle on the collapse 
strength  of the  rock or the lowest permissible borehole pressure. 
The upper curve assumes normal pore' pressure for a porous isotrop(cid:173)
ic  Leuder's limestone.  For hole angles  of -y=0 to  50°  [0  to  0.87 
rad],  a certain  reduction  in  borehole pressure  is  permissible,  but 
at an  angle  of -y=54°  [0.94  rad],  the  hole  will  collapse in  shear 
if the  borehole pressure is  equal  to  the  initial  pore pressure.  For 
higher borehole angles, the hole will collapse if drilled in balance. 
This rock is nearly isotropic and has no weakness planes.  It is clearly 

368 

1.2 

0.8 

0.4 

'iii 
0. 
"E 
.!!! 
" I! 
0 en en 
!!! 
.. 
iii 
~ 
U 
:! 
w 

0 

0 

~IA 

~611) 

~I 

Vertical 

Zero Radial 
Effective Stress 
(COllapse)~ 

Stress State After 
r  Hole is Drilled 
I 

ii' 

~~ 

Zero Tangential 
Effective Stress 

~~d'Mg) 

Path of Least 
Tensile Stress 

0.4 

0.8 

1.2 

Borehole Pressure  Gradient, psl/ft 

Fig.  9-Tensile stresses for deep vertical  well. 

seen that  for  weak  rocks,  however,  collapse  of high-angle  holes 
is a strong possibility, and similar behavior of real wells is actually 
reported from the North Sea. The values for Leuder limestone shown 
in  Fig.  7  were  developed  as  shown  in  the  following  example. 

Assume  we  have  the  following  data  at  10,000  ft  [3050  m]: 
ao=0.95 psi/ft [21.5 kPa/m],  aTi =aT2 =0.85 psi/ft [19.2 kPa/m]. 
If the same procedures are followed as those used for  Fig.  4 (use 
of Eqs. A-3, A-2, and A-4), the principal stresses at 10,000 ft [3050 
m]  become  al = 17,000 psi  [117  MPa]-pw,  a2 =9,500 psi  [65.5 
MPa],  and  a3 =Pw  for  a  vertical  hole  (-y=0°  [0  rad]).  From 
Chenevert  and  Gatlin,14  the  failure  parameters  for  Eq.  2  are 
7 0 =2,500  psi  [17.2  MPa]  and  ex=35°  [0.61  rad].  Inserting  the 
principal stresses and a pore pressure equal to Pw  into Eq.  3, then 
these results into Eq.  2, together with the failure parameters 70 and 
ex,  the left and  right sides of Eq.  2 are satisfied for Pw=3,690 psi 
[25.4 MPa].  This value is shown for -y=0°  [0 rad]  in Fig.  7.  Note 
that for collapse pressures below the initial pore pressure, the mud(cid:173)
cake has no effect, because fluids can freely flow  from the formation 
into the  wellbore.  Therefore,  we  must  set Pfm =Pw  when solving 
the above equations.  Finally, if the previous procedure is repeated 
by  inserting  -y = 10°,  20°  [0.17  rad,  0.35  rad],  etc.,  in  Eq.  A-3, 
the  complete  upper  curve  of Fig.  7  is  constructed. 

The lower curve of Fig. 7 shows the same case for Green River 
shale, which has directional shear strengths and a clear weak zone 
in the neighborhood of -y= 15°  [0.26 rad], where the weakness plane 
comes into play.  We have assumed that this shale is impermeable, 
keeping the pore pressure constant inside the rock.  Also, it is much 
stronger than the limestone. Values for this curve were determined 
as in the previous example, except for different shear-strength data 
(Ref.  14). 

Fig.  8 shows the collapse pressure vs.  depth for Leuder's lime(cid:173)

stone,  using  the same two data sets as  previously described.  Two 
curves are given, one for the collapse of a horizontal hole (-y=90° 
[1.57  rad])  and  one for a vertical hole (-y=0°  [0  rad]).  It is again 
seen that the collapse pressure increases with borehole angle. Also, 
it is observed that the well becomes more sensitive toward collapse 
with  depth.  In  fact,  at  12,000 ft  [3660  m],  for  the  vertical  hole 
(-y=0° [0 rad]), the collapse pressure is equal to the pore pressure. 
Evaluating  Fig.  8,  we see that at deeper depths-e.g.,  20,000 

ft  [6100 m], the borehole will collapse at a borehole pressure con(cid:173)
siderably  above  the  pore  pressure.  On  the  basis  of deep-drilling 
experience, one can question whether this is true.  Probably, there 
are  elastoplastic  effects  present  in  a  real  borehole,  as  well  as 
anisotropic effects that are not taken into account here. We believe, 
however,  that some  qualitative information can be deduced  from 
this analysis.  The borehole becomes more susceptible toward col(cid:173)
lapse the greater the inclination.  Also,  it is more likely to collapse 
at greater depth because of the increase of the general stress field. 
If the  rock is  laminated,  it typically has a weakness plane,  which 
gives the borehole high sensitivity toward collapse for borehole in(cid:173)
clinations  between  10  and  40 0  [0.17  and  0.7  rad]. 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering.  December  1987 

o 

, , , , 

\ 
\ 
\ 

Corrected 

Initial 

SOOO 

:: 

i o 
"B 10OOO 
1: 
~ 
CD 
2 
I-

lS000 

(J 

CI c 
'in 
C\l 
f!! 
.E 
.c 
Q. 
CII 
C 

-Q-

1 

Denudation 

I 

-6-I 

Horizontal 
In-5itu Stress 

20 000 !----+-----.---'---t-----+'---_+___' 

O.S 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

Stress Gradient Increasing -

Ratio:  In·situ Stress/Overburden 

Fig. 10-Vertical and horizontal stress gradients vs.  depth. 

Fig.  l1-Ratio horizontal/overburden stress vs.  depth. 

For cases  with  high  tectonic  in-situ  stress in  one direction,  the 
borehole may  be made very  stable toward collapse by  inclining it 
in the  direction  of the least  in-situ stress.  Here one failure  enve(cid:173)
lope applies for all inclinations as shown in Case A of Fig.  5.  On 
the other hand, inclining the borehole in the direction of maximum 
horizontal in-situ stress gives conditions for the weakness plane to 
apply, with resultant collapse problems between 10 and 40 0  [0.17-
and  0.7 -rad]  inclination. 

We believe that the weakness plane is a real effect,  but possibly 
the Mohr-Coulomb criterion is too harsh with depth. The simulations 
also showed us  that the weak chalks apparently are most sensitive 
toward collapse followed by the shales, and that the sandstones are 
the  strongest  rocks. 

Tensile Failure 
Tensile failure occurs when the least effective principal stress ex(cid:173)
ceeds the rock tensile strength (see Eq.  A-5) for a definition of prin(cid:173)
cipal  stresses): 

f1gr - Pjm S  f1tensile'  ................................. (4) 

Bradley 8  argues,  and we agree, that the tensile strength of the rock 
is  zero,  because  it  is  assumed  that  a  fracture  initiates  in  a  flaw, 
joint, or existing fracture.  Tensile failure  of the rock  is  the  most 
important failure  mechanism of a well bore because the  rock is  so 
weak  in  tension.  We use  Bradley's definition  here.  To  illustrate 
the  mechanisms  of  borehole  failures,  consider  the  following 
example. 

As  a  well  may  be subjected  to  fracturing  pressures,  as  well  as 
drawdown pressures,  a  complete  model  should take  into  account 
both extremes.  Assume a deep vertical well with equal in-situ stress(cid:173)
es of 0.9 psi/ft [20.4 kPa/m] and an overburden gradient of 1 psi/ft 
[22.6 kPa/m].  The pore-pressure gradient is assumed to be 0.465 
psi/ft [10.5 kPa/m].  Eqs.  A-3, A-2, and A-4 for principal stresses 
at the well bore will  then reduce to the  following,  if we apply the 
effective-stress  concept from  Eq.  A-5. 

For  radial  effective  stress, 

f1i=f1r-Pjm=Pw-0.465;  .......................... (5a) 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

for  tangential  effective  stress, 

and  for  vertical  effective  stress, 

f1:\ = f1z  -Pjm =0.535 ............................... (5c) 

Because all shear terms vanish in this idealized case, Eqs. 5a through 
5c all represent principal stresses. All these principal effective stress(cid:173)
es are plotted in Fig. 9 as a function of the wellbore pressure. Three 
data points are plotted on these stress lines that reflect the state of 
stress at the borehole wall right after the well is drilled.  By  increasing 
the  pressure  in  the  borehole,  PW'  we  see  that  the  vertical  stress 
stays constant, the tangential stress goes down, and the radial stress 
increases. If the tangential stress reaches the zero value, as we have 
shown  for Pw = 1.3  psi/ft  [29.4  kPa/m],  fracturing  occurs. 

To  use  the  figure,  note  that  the  least  effective  principal  stress 
is  the critical  value,  and when any  of the  stresses go below the x 
axis,  the  rock  goes  into  tension  and  fails. 

Note that when the borehole pressure reaches that of the  native 
formation  fluids,  the effective radial  stress is  zero (see Fig.  9 for 
Pw =0.465  psi/ft  [10.5  kPa/m]).  Therefore,  we  will  claim  that 
when the borehole pressure is equal to or lower than the formation 
pressure,  the  possibility  for  radial  tensile  failure  exists. 

If the borehole pressure is increased froin such values, the radial 
stress  is  the  least  principal  stress  up  to  a  value  where  the  radial 
and tangential stresses are equal (see Fig.  9 for Pw=0.9 psi/ft [20.4 
kPa/m]). At this point, the borehole has maximum stability and the' 
stress state is equal to that for the virgin formation.  By  increasing 
the wellbore pressure beyond this  point,  the  stability  of the  well(cid:173)
bore gradually decreases;  however,  note that the tangential stress 
is  now  the  least  principal  stress.  Finally,  when  the  failure  curve 
is  reached, the tangential stress goes tensile and a vertical fracture 
occurs. 

Borehole  collapse  is  defined  as  a  shear  failure.  Fig.  9  at 
Pw =0.435 psi/ft [9.8 kPa/m]  suggests that a tensile failure  mode 
may  exist  simultaneously,  as  Haimson  and  Herrick9  concluded. 
However, we use only the tensile failure as the failure mechanisms 
during  fracturing. 

369 

This  discussion  explains  the  observed  behavior  of boreholes. 
When fracturing a wellbore, a fracture penetrating radially outward 
will be created. It is believed that this mechanism is mostly tensile, 
but the high shear stresses defined by Eq.  1 may accompany failure 
and possibly affect the direction of the fracture away from the bore(cid:173)
hole.  When a borehole has  collapsed,  sometimes spalling has oc(cid:173)
curred.  Here,  concoidal-fracture pattern is  often seen on the  rock 
fragments brought up to the surface. This pattern is created by shear 
failure of the borehole wall.  The rock fragments are then released 
from  the  borehole  by  a  radially  tensile  failure. 

Horizontal vs.  Vertical Fractures 
The field of petroleum engineering is  concerned mostly  with deep 
wells.  There are cases,  however,  where shallow-well behavior is 
important. 

The stress equations do not explain why horizontal fractures form 

above about 2,000 ft [610 m], while at greater depths, vertical frac(cid:173)
tures form,  as given by Schechter. 15  The answer may be given by 
Jamison and Cook 16  and Brown, 17  who report that the horizontal 
in-situ stresses near the surface often exceed the overburden weight. 
They  conclude  that  this  may  be  a  result  of movement  of crustal 
plates, plastic yield and subsequent elastic deformation on unloading 
during partial denudation, creep under sustained loads on geologic 
time scale, topography, tectonic forces of often ill-defined origin, 
and a general contraction of the earth's crust. For example, imagine 
a piece of rock buried very deeply and subjected to high loads. When 
the  surface  erodes,  the  rock  will  be  uncovered.  The  overburden 
weight  has  been  reduced  significantly,  but the  two  horizontal  in(cid:173)
situ stresses will remain basically the same as at greater depth. The 
effects described imply that horizontal fractures occur near the sur(cid:173)
face,  because the  horizontal  in-situ  stresses here often exceed the 
weight  of the  overburden. 

Fracture Gradient for Deviated Boreholes 
When  a  new  field  development  is  started,  a  number  of vertical 
delineation wells are usually drilled.  At this point, information about 
the  wells and  the  field  is  limited.  After finishing  a  well,  one  has 
some leakoff data available  or lost-circulation informljtion,  over(cid:173)
burden data,  and pore-pressure information.  Although limited, these 
data will  be shown useful  in  predicting the fracture initiation gra(cid:173)
dients for inclined boreholes drilled in the same formation.  In other 
words, using all available information from the early development 
stage, we can predict the expected behavior for the production drill(cid:173)
ing phase and for the life of the field.  One assumption,  however, 
is that the area of the delineation wells and the rest of the reservoir 
basically have the same properties. This paper studies wellbore frac(cid:173)
ture at  the borehole wall only,  which  therefore provides informa(cid:173)
tion  on  fracture  initiation  and  not  fracture  propagation. 

Pore pressure can be obtained by direct measurements in sands 
or indirectly in shales by, for example, the d-exponent method.  The 
overburden-weight curve is typically generated from density logs. 
Inspection of the stress equations  (Eqs.  A-2  and A-3)  reveals that 
the only unknowns are the horizontal in-situ stresses, provided that 
the fracture gradient is known: Direct measurements of the in-situ 
stresses are not  performed in deeper wells except for very special 
cases. Because the magnitUdes of the horizontal in-situ stresses are 
absolutely  necessary  to apply  the  proposed method,  they  must be 
obtained  by  indirect  means.  To  do  so,  we  will  first  assume  that 
the two horizontal in-situ stresses are equal.  This is a common as(cid:173)
sumption for  a  relaxed  continuous depositional  basin,  but  not al(cid:173)
ways  true. 

For a deeper vertical borehole, a vertical fracture will form, and 

as discussed earlier, the fracture pressure is  a function of the tan(cid:173)
gential stress in Eq. 5 and the tensile failure criteria in Eq. 4. When 
fracture  pressure  is  solved  for  the  horizontal  in-situ  stresses,  it 
becomes 

aT!  =Y2(pwj+Pjin+atensile+A),  ..................... (6) 

where  A  is  a  correlation  coefficient and  atensile =0,  according  to 
Eq.  4.  Now  the  horizontal  in-situ  stresses  can  be  estimated.  We 
used fracture-gradient curves and an overburden-gradient curve from 
the  U.S.  gulf coast  area  derived  by  Eaton 2  and  calculated  the 
horizontal  in-situ  stresses  using  Eq.  6,  assuming  that  A=O.  The 

370 

results of these calculations are shown in Fig.  10.  The ratio of the 
horizontal in-situ stress over the weight of the overburden is  shown 
in Fig.  II. This ratio is  on  the order of 70%,  a rather low  value. 
Diagrams  compiled  by  Pilkington 5  show  consistently  higher 
values. 

Next, we use this information to construct fracture-gradient dia(cid:173)

grams for  inclined boreholes.  As an example,  we arbitrarily want 
the  gradient at  a  20 0  [O.35-rad]  inclination.  First,  we  transform 
the in-situ stress field to the borehole orientation by Eq.  A-3.  Next, 
we calculate the stresses caused by the borehole itself with Eq.  A-2. 
Because the  horizontal  in-situ stresses are assumed equal,  we  get 
a stress state that is  independent of the calculated geographic direc(cid:173)
tion or the azimuth.  Finally, the principal stresses are formed from 
Eq. A-4.  All this is done numerically, because combining all these 
equations is impractical, and to find the fracture gradient, an itera(cid:173)
tive routine must be used by gradually increasing the borehole pres(cid:173)
sure until Eq. 4 is satisfied. However, the angle around the borehole, 
(),  is  also  a  variable,  and  we  must  find  the  critical  value  for  this 
angle.  Differentiating the principal  stresses  with  respect to  ()  and 
setting the resultant equation equal to zero, the minimum principal 
stress is found  at (}=oo  [0 rad]  for the case of equal horizontal in(cid:173)
situ  stresses.  Introducing this  information  into  the previously  de(cid:173)
fined  equation  and  letting  A =0,  we  have 

pwj=3ay -ax -Pjin'  ............................... (7) 

Fracture gradients  for  all  hole  angles  from  vertical  to  horizontal 
position  were  computed  with  Eq.  7.  The  results  are  shown  in 
Fig.  12. 

Before proceeding further, let us look at the two diagrams shown 
in Figs.  11  and  12.  First, from Fig.  11,  we have already observed 
that the horizontal  in-situ  stress  is  remarkably  low.  A horizontal 
in-situ  stress  is  expected to  approach the overburden weight  with 
depth,  while here it approaches  only  70%.  Second,  inspection of 
Fig.  12  reveals quite a spread in  the fracture gradients  at a given 
depth.  In  fact,  the  reduction  of the  fracturing  gradient  when  the 
hole is rotated from a vertical to a horizontal position is  more than 
5 Ibm/gal at 20,000 ft  [600 kg/m3  at 6100 m].  Clearly,  this value 
is  extreme.  With  insufficient  good  field  data  to  back  it  up,  field 
experience  generally  does  not  show  such  a  large  variation. 

The case studied  is  for  a normally pressurized formation.  Also 
interpreted from this diagram is that horizontal holes are not stable 
above 4,800 ft  [1460 m]  when drilling in balance, a clearly wrong 
conclusion. 

On the  basis  of the  previous  discussion,  the  conclusion  is  that 
this  particular data  set gives us  too  low  values  for  the  horizontal 
in-situ  stresses and  that an adjustment must be made  through the 
correlation coefficient A  in  Eq.  6.  Knowing  that  Eq.  A-2  strictly 
cannot predict horizontal fractures  at shallower depths,  we adjust 
the surface fracturing gradient because more rigorous criteria are 
lacking.  Simply, the solution of Eq.  7 will  be  forced  to  be stable 
at surface-i.e, a horizontal hole drilled in balance (mud pressure 
equals pore pressure)  will  be  stable and  not fracture.  Choosing a 
value for A with the above condition resulted in a fracture-gradient 
diagram  as  in  Fig.  13.  The corrected horizontal  in-situ  stress  in 
Eq. 6 was used, together with the failure criterion ofEq. 4 replaced 
by  the  correlation coefficient,  A.  Now  the  difference  in  fracture 
gradients  for  a  vertical  fracture  and  a  horizontal  hole  is  reduced 
from  >5 to  <2 Ibm/gal  [>600 to  <240 kg/m3].  The corrected 
horizontal  in-situ line  in  Fig.  10  shows the adjusted  in-situ  stress 
curve, which now is on the order of90% of the overburden weight, 
a  more  realistic  value. 

The procedure described  was  performed for  all  pore pressures 
up to  16 Ibm/gal  [1917 kg/m3], and the correlation coefficient was 
found  to  be a  linear  function  of the  pore  pressure: 

k=0.8-0.048pjin'  ................................. (8) 

where  k  is  in  psi/ft  and Pjin  is  in  pounds  per gallon. 

The argument for introducing this correlation coefficient is sim(cid:173)
ply  to  be  able  to  put  field  data  into  a  continuum-mechanics  per(cid:173)
spective.  Stress  measurements  should be  performed in the future 
to check whether the in-situ stresses actually correspond to the cor(cid:173)
rected  curve  in  Fig.  11. 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

, 
" , 

"-

"-" 

O~,----~----------------------' 

o.-~~~---------------------, 

5000 

= s: 
ii. 
2l 
~ 10000 
;: 
~ 
2 
I-

G) 

15000 

5000 

= i Q 

~10ooo 
;: 
~ 
2 
I-

G) 

15000 

~OOO~ ________ -+-ll~~-L~~~~~ 

9 

11 

13 

15 

17 

19 

~OOO~ ____ ~ ____ ~ ________ ~~ __ ~~ 

9 

11 

13 

15 

17 

19 

Fracture Gradient, psilft 

Fracture Gradient, psi/ft 

Fig. l2-Fracture gradients for deviated boreholes; normally 
pressurized formation (9  Ibm/gal). 

Fig. l3-Corrected fracture gradients for deviated boreholes; 
normally pressurized formation  (9  Ibm/gal). 

We do  not  currently  have a good understanding of this correla(cid:173)

tion  coefficient,  whether  it  represents  such  physical  mechanisms 
as  anisotropy  or compensates  for  a  systematic  error  in  the  input 
data.  By constructing such diagrams as Fig.  13 for higher pore pres(cid:173)
sures, however, they all had the same parallel or bond characteris(cid:173)
tic. Therefore, we derived a simple equation for the fracture pressure 
per  foot  of depth  for  inclined  boreholes: 

Pwj('Y)=P'ivj+V3(po-16)sin 2  'Y,  ..................... (9) 

where  sin 2  'Y  is  in  pounds  per gallon.  This  equation  is  useful  to 
predict the fracture-pressure gradient for inclined production wells. 
It only requires the vertical fracture gradient, the borehole inclina(cid:173)
tion, and the pore pressure as input parameters. It is valid for pore 
pressures  up  to  16  Ibm/gal  [1917  kg/m3]. 

Finally,  Aadnoy 12  found  that  the  shales  typically  have  a  high 
fracture gradient because they are nearly impermeable. If the rock 
is impermeable,  the borehole pressure will  not penetrate the  rock 
and  therefore will not aid  in  fracturing the rock  inside the pores. 
Sands will accept some leakoff from the  mud,  thereby  increasing 
the pore pressure inside the hole wall, which makes them weaker. 
This also suggests the importance of having a good-quality mudcake. 

Conclusions 
The two major types of borehole instability-borehole collapse and 
fracturing of the borehole-were studied for deviated boreholes by 
use of an ideal linear elastic and isotropic model.  Input parameters 
used were Eaton's fracture data and overburden data for the U. S. 
gulf coast area and Chenevert's directional shear data.  The objective 
was to derive quantitative criteria where possible, but also qualitative 
information regarding the behavior of inclined boreholes. To sum(cid:173)
marize,  the  following  conclusions  were  reached. 

Borehole col/apse at low borehole pressures is  caused by  shear 
failure  in  combination  with tensile  failure.  Generally,  the deeper 
the well, the more likely the borehole is to become sensitive toward 
collapse. With the von Mises yield condition, it was found that in(cid:173)
creasing the borehole angle did not increase the sensitivity toward 
collapse. More trust was put into the study with the Mohr-Coulomb 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

shear-failure theory, and Jaeger's weakness-plane theory.  Here we 
found  that the  higher the borehole inclination,  the  more  sensitive 
toward  collapse the isotropic  rocks becOIJ1e.  For weak chalks,  in 
particular, this may become a serious problem. For laminated rocks, 
the weakness plane makes the  rock strongly sensitive toward col(cid:173)
lapse  in  the  range  of 10 to 40°  [0.17- to  0.7-rad]  inclination  for 
a relaxed depositional basin.  In a tectonically  stressed  region,  on 
the other hand, the collapse stability can be improved by inclining 
the  borehole in  the  same direction as  the  least  in-situ  stress.  Our 
simulations also  indicated that the weak chalks are most sensitive 
toward  collapse,  followed  by  the  shales,  and  that the  sandstones 
are  the  strongest  rocks. 

Fracturing of the borehole is mainly a tensile failure.  In general, 

the fracturing gradient decreased with increased borehole inclina(cid:173)
tion.  A simple formula was derived with which the fracturing gra(cid:173)
dient could be estimated for any borehole angle, provided that the 
fracturing  gradient  for  a  vertical  hole  and  the  pore  pressure are 
known.  To arrive at these results, the horizontal in-situ stresses had 
to  be adjusted  with  a  correlation  coefficient. 

Fracturing of the borehole  must be avoided,  especially for  oil(cid:173)
based muds.  This equation therefore serves as a useful tool to esti(cid:173)
mate the value for  the formation-integrity test.  Finally, the shales 
are apparently the strongest rocks in the hole because they are nearly 
impermeable. This suggests that a very good mudcake should pre(cid:173)
vent lost circulation in a sandstone formation, as discussed by Hub(cid:173)
bert  and  Willis. 4 

The  occurrence of horizontal  fractures  at  shallow  depth  is  be(cid:173)

lieved to be caused mainly by the horizontal stresses being larger 
than  the  weight  of the  overburden. 

Future Work 
As stated earlier, there is currently considerable interest in the bore(cid:173)
hole stability of deviated boreholes in Norway because of a number 
of offshore  fields  under  development.  The  proposed  fracturing(cid:173)
gradient model is currently being evaluated against older oil fields. 
We are also working on more advanced models,  however,  incor(cid:173)
porating anisotropic rock behavior, possible plastic effects, and also 
. taking into account the regional geology.  Regarding borehole col-

371 

lapse, a larger program is under way in Norway to determine rock 
properties and critical parameters experimentally.  Also, a compre(cid:173)
hensive  numerical  simulator  developed  by  Aadnoy 12 
takes 
anisotropic  effects  into  account.  The  basic  research  is  important 
to pursue. Application of the huge amounts of information available 
in the oil companies-information that is  not currently adequately 
utilized and that forms the basis for the application of any theory-is 
as  important. 

Drilling and Logging Data.  The  mud  logger  on  site  compiles  a 
large amount of data.  These are routinely  sent to the  engineering 
department where some of them are used.  However, a large portion 
are  never  organized,  just  stored  somewhere.  A  more  systematic 
analysis  of all  drilling  and  logging  data  definitely  is  needed. 

Performing LeakotT Tests. All oil companies have their own proce(cid:173)
dures to follow  when a leakoff test is performed. Typically, when 
pumping  at  a constant  rate,  the  increase  in  pressure  is  recorded. 
The point at which the pressure vs.  the cumulative pumped volume 
deviates from a straight line is typically taken as the leakoff point. 
Two main problems are associated with this type of test.  First, the 
pressure chosen may not represent the true leakoff pressure. Second, 
experience shows that if two engineers run the same test, they may 
arrive  at  different  leakoff pressures.  Another  problem arises  be(cid:173)
cause of lack of knowledge  of mud  properties.  Mud gel  strength 
and mud density are two such parameters.  It may  be  necessary to 
run  leakoff tests  with  bottomhole-pressure gauges  in  place to get 
accurate  pressure  values. 

Two Fracturing-Gradient Diagrams. Most fracturing-gradient es(cid:173)
timation methods  found  in  the literature  neglect to  correlate with 
lithology.  The casing points are usually  found  in competent shale 
sections and therefore represent the strong sections of the open hole. 
Lost circulation,  on the  other hand,  often occurs in sands,  which 
give  lower  fracturing  gradients.  Therefore,  we  suggest  that  two 
fracturing-gradient diagrams be developed,  one for the shales and 
one  for  the  sandstones  or chalks. 

Lost-Circulation and Collapse Information. Every time lost cir(cid:173)
culation is experienced or signs of borehole collapse are seen, ef(cid:173)
forts  should  be  made  to  establish  the  wellbore  pressure  at  the 
incident.  This is  valuable information when fracture and collapse 
diagrams  for  the  borehole  are  constructed.  Other  relevant 
information-e.g., borehole  inclination and lithology-should, of 
course,  accompany  the  pressure data  as  input data  to  a  borehole 
simulator.  The direction of the collapse, for example,  indicates the 
direction of the  least  in-situ  stress.  This type  of information  will 
provide  valuable  insight  into  the  behavior of the  borehole  under 
the drilling phase, as well as the completion and production phases 
of the  well. 

Fracture Initiation and Propagation. The models used in this study 
are based on continuum-mechanics principles and define only the 
fracture-initiation pressure. The propagation of a fracture is a differ(cid:173)
ent  problem  and  should  be analyzed  by  fracture  mechanics. 

Once  a fracture  is  initiated,  it  is  believed  that  the  pressure  re(cid:173)

quired to extend it corresponds to the least in-situ stress in the rock 
mass  and  the  direction of the  fracture  may  therefore  shift  as  the 
fracture propagates away from the borehole.  This paper makes no 
attempt  to  define  crack-propagation-failure  theory. 

Nomenclature 

a  =  constant  used  for  wellbore  radius 
A,k  =  correlation  coefficients 
li' =  deviatoric  stress  invariant  (Eq.  la),  psi/ft  [kPa/m] 
Pjm  =  formation  pressure per  foot  of depth,  psi/ft 

[kPa/m] 

Pw  =  wellbore  pressure  per  foot  of depth,  psilft  [kPa/m] 
P'i.t  =  fracturing  pressure  per foot  of depth  for  vertical 

well,  psilft  [kPa/m] 

Pwj('Y)  =  fracturing  pressure  per foot  of depth  at  any 

borehole  angle,  'Y,  psi/ft  [kPa/m] 

372 

r  =  radius  from  borehole  center 
S  =  arithmetic  average  of three  normal  stresses, 

psi  [kPa] 

x  =  reference  axis  of coordinate  system 
ex  =  angle 

tan  ex  =  rock  coefficient of internal  friction 

(3  =  angle  between axial  load  and  bedding  plane  during 

triaxial  tests 

"y  =  borehole  deviation  from  vertical 
oij  =  Kronecker  delta 
e =  angular  position  around  borehole 
JL  =  Poisson's  ratio,  -0.2 for  most  rocks  (assumed) 
u'  =  effective  normal  stress  per foot  of depth, 

psi/ft [kPa/m] 

u gr  =  rock  grain  stress  per  foot  of depth,  psilft  [kPa/m] 
U ij  =  total  stresses 
U ij  =  effective  stresses 
Uk  =  principal  stress  per  foot  of depth,  psi/ft  [kPa/m] 
uk  =  effective  principal  stress  per foot  of depth, 

psi/ft [kPa/m] 

U a  =  overburden  stress  per foot  of depth,  psi/ft  [kPa/m] 

ur,ue,uz  =  normal  stress  per  foot  of depth  in  cylindrical 

coordinates,  psi/ft  [kPa/m] 

Utensile  =  tensile  rock  strength  per foot  of depth, 

psi/ft [kPa/m] 

UTI ,Un  =  horizontal  in-situ  stress  per foot  of depth, 

psi/ft [kPa/m] 

ux,uy,UZZ  =  normal  stress  per foot  of depth  in  rectangular 

coordinates  (actually  normal  to  and  parallel  to 
hole  axis),  psilft  [kPa/m] 

Ul 'U2 'U3  =  principal  stress  per  foot  of depth,  psilft  [kPa/m] 

T  =  shear  stress,  psi  [kPa] 

Tij,Tkf  =  stress  tensors,  psi  [kPa] 
T max  =  maximum  shear  stress,  psi  [kPa] 
T a  =  cohesive  rock  strength,  psi  [kPa] 

7 xy ,TxZ ' 

T yz  =  shear  stress  per  foot  of depth  in  rectangular 

coordinates,  psi/ft  [kPa/m] 

Tez  =  shear  stress  per foot  of depth  in  cylindrical 

coordinates,  psi/ft  [kPa/m] 

¢  =  borehole  azimuth  angle  from  x  axis 

Superscripts 

iJ,k,£ =  tensor  indices 

Acknowledgments 
We express appreciation to William B.  Bradley and the many peo(cid:173)
ple who have supported and encouraged this work.  Special thanks 
go  to  Rogaland  U.,  Norway,  and  to the  members  of the  Drilling 
Fluids  Research  Program at  the  U .of Texas-Chevron Oil  Field 
Research  Co.,  Conoco Inc.,  Shell  Development Co.,  and  Union 
Oil Co.  of California-who provided the necessary time and finan(cid:173)
cial  support. 

References 
1.  Matthews, W.R. and Kelley, J.:  "How To Predict Formation Pressure 

and  Fracture  Gradient,"  Oil  &  Gas J.  (Feb.  1967)  92-106. 

2.  Eaton,  B. A.:  "Fracture  Gradient  Prediction  and  Its  Application  in 
Oilfield Operations," JPT (Oct.  1969)  1353-60;  Trans.,  AIME, 246. 
3.  Anderson,  R.A.,  Ingram,  D.S.,  and  Zanier,  A.M.:  "Determining 
Fracture  Pressure  Gradients  From  Well  Logs,"  JPT  (Nov.  1973) 
1259-68. 

4.  Hubbert, M.K. and Willis, D.G.: "Mechanics of Hydraulic Fracturing," 

JPT (June  1957)  153-68;  Trans.,  AIME,  210. 

5.  Pilkington,  P.E.:  "Fracture Gradient  Estimates in  Tertiary  Basins," 

Pet.  Eng.  IntI.  (May  1978)  138-48. 

6.  Brennan,  R.M.  and  Annis,  M.R.:  "A  New  Fracture  Prediction 
-Technique That Shows Good Results in the Gulf of Mexico Abnormal 
Pressure,"  paper  SPE  13210  presented  at  the  1984  SPE  Annual 
Technical  Conference  and  Exhibition,  Houston,  Sept.  16-19. 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

7.  Daines, S.R.:  "Prediction of Fracture Pressures for Wildcat Wells," 

JPT (April  1982)  863-72. 

8.  Bradley, W.B.:  "Failure of Inclined Boreholes," J.  Energy Res.  Tech. 

(Dec.  1979)  232-39;Trans.,  AIME,  101. 

9.  Haimson, B.C. and Herrick, C.G.:  "Borehole Breakouts-a New Tool 
for Estimating In-Situ Stresses?," Proc., Inti. Symposium on Rock Stress 
and Rock Stress Measurements, Stockholm (Sept.  1-3, 1986) 271-80. 
10.  Llewelyn, B.C.:  "Compaction and Failure Studies on Texas Gulf Coast 
Geopressured Geothermal Sandstones and  Shales,"  MS  thesis,  U.  of 
Texas,  Austin  (May  1980). 

II. Chenevert, M.E.: "Adsorptive Pore Pressures of Argillaceous Rocks," 
Proc.,  II th Symposium on Rock Mechanics, U.  of California, Berkeley 
(June  1969)  599-627. 

12.  Aadnoy, B.S.:  "Modeling of the Stability of Highly Inclined Boreholes 
in Anisotropic  Rock Formations," paper SPE  16526 presented at the 
1987  SPE  Offshore  Europe  Conference,  Aberdeen,  Sept.  8-11. 

13.  Jaeger, J.e.: "Shear Failure of Anisotropic Rocks," Geol.  Mag.  (1960) 

97,65-72. 

14.  Chenevert,  M.E.  and  Gatlin,  C.:  "Mechanical  Anisotropies  of 
Laminated Sedimentary Rocks,"  SPEJ (March  1965) 67-77;  Trans., 
AIME,234. 

IS.  Schechter,  R.S.:  Advanced  Production  Notes,  U.  of  Texas  Coop 

Bookstore,  Austin  (1984). 

16.  Jamison,  D.B.  and  Cook,  N.G.:  "An Analysis  of Measured  Values 
for the State of Stress in the Earth's Crust," report LBL-7671, SAC-07, 
Earth  Sciences  Div.,  Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratory  and  Dept.  of 
Mineral Science and  Mining  Engineering,  U.  of California, Berkeley 
(Aug.  1978). 

17.  Brown, E.T. and Hoke,  E.:  "Trends in Relationships Between Measured 
In-Situ Stresses and  Depth," technical note,  Inti.  J.  Rock Mech.  Min. 
Sci.  &  Geomech.  Abstr.  (Aug.  1978)  15,  211-15. 

Appendix 
Stress Around a Borehole. The equations for stress around a bore(cid:173)
hole  as  a  function  of radial  distance  away  from  the  wellbore  are 
given. The model assumes linear elasticity and isotropic rock prop(cid:173)
erties. The solution is based on plane-strain conditions. Derivations 
of the equations can be found  in Refs.  9 and  10.  Note that we de(cid:173)
fine  compressive  stresses  as  positive. 

In·Situ Stresses: 

Stresses After Transformation: 

z 

1. 

y 

Borehole Reference System: 

x---?'1I:-=---..-y 

x 

Fig.  A·1-Coordlnate transformations. 

At  the  borehole,  r=a,  and  these  equations  reduce  to 

U r =pw,  ...................................... (A-2a) 

-T  1+3- sin  20--p 

( 
xy 

4

a
r 4 

) 

2 

a
r2  W' 

T rO =T rz =0,  ................................... (A-2d) 

and 

Toz =2( -Txz  sin  O+TyZ  cos  0) . .................... (A-2e) 

Stresses When the Axis is Rotated. The principal in-situ stresses 
are transformed to the orientation of the borehole with the follow(cid:173)
ing  tensor  operator: 

................. (A-Ib) 

oxk  axe 
oxi  oxj 
T"=Tke--' 

IJ 

The results of this  transformation use the absolute angle between 
the  respective  axis.  By  introducing  a  set  of reference  angles,  as 
shown in Fig.  A-I, the  above tensor can be transformed  into  the 
following  set  of equations: 

.................................. (A-Id) 

Trz=(TXZ  cos  O+TyZ  sin 0)(1- ::).  ............... (A-Ie) 

uy=(un  sin 2  cj>+uT2  cos 2  cj»,  •.•...•••....•..... (A-3b) 

TOZ=(-TXZ  sin  O+TyZ  cos  8)(1+ ::).  ............. (A-If) 

Tyz =0.5(UT2 -un)sin(2cj»sin /" 

.................. (A-3d) 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

373 

Txz =0.5(UTI  COS 2  </I+Un  sin 2  </I-uo)sin(2'Y),  ...... (A-3e) 

pore pressure,  gives  us  the  total  stresses 

and 

Uij=(Uij+Oij)Pfm,  ............................... (A-5) 

Txy =0.5(un -uTI)sin(2</1)cos 2  'Y. 

. ................ (A-3f) 

Here,  the borehole deviation from vertical is defined as 'Y  and the 
projected orientation with respect to the x axis is </I.  (See Fig.  A-I). 

Principal Stresses. We are interested in the principal stresses, which 
are calculated  as  follows: 

UI  =Ur=Pw  ., ................................. (A-4a) 

and 

After the  principal  stresses  are calculated  according  to  Eq.  A-4, 
the subscripts are rearranged so that UI  is the largest and u3  is the 
smallest principal stress.  This is necessary to use the Mohr-Coulomb 
theory  properly. 

where 

uij  =  total  stresses  in  the  ij direction, 
uij  =  effective  stresses  in  the  ij direction, 
Pfm  =  pore  pressure,  and 
oij  =  Kronecker delta. 

Rigorous  analysis  shows  that  Eq.  A-5  is  a  simplification  for  a 
compacted rock.  For isotropic rocks, the Kronecker delta must be 
multiplied by a scaling factor, and for anisotropic rocks, each stress 
component has its own pore-pressure coefficient.  Aadnoy 12  studied 
this in detail.  For this analysis,  however,  we will assume that Eq. 
A-5  is  sufficiently  accurate. 

51  Metric Conversion Factors 

degrees  x  1.745329 

ft  x  3.048* 

Ibm/gal  x  1.198 264 
psi  x  6.894 757 
psi/ft  x  2.262 059 

E-02 
E-OI 
E+02 
E+OO 
E+OI 

rad 
m 
kg/m3 
kPa 
kPa/m 

Effective Stresses. When stresses in porous materials are consid(cid:173)
ered, we usually assume the material to be a continuous medium. 
According  to  Terzaghi's effective-stress  principle,  we  let  the  in(cid:173)
terparticle forces form effective stresses, which when added to the 

• Conversion  factor  is  exact. 

SPEDE 

Original SPE manuscript received for review March 15, 1987. Paper accepted for publication 
July 16,1987. Revised manuscript received Sept. 11, 1987. Paper (SPE 16052) first present(cid:173)
ed at the  1987 SPE/IADC Drilling  Conference  held in  New Orleans,  March  15-18. 

374 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1987 

Discussion of Stability of Highly Inclined Boreholes 
H.  Simison, SPE,  Bolland  & Co. 

I have  read  Aadnoy  and  Chenevert's paper,  "Stability of Highly 
Inclined  Boreholes"  (Dec.  1987  SPEDE,  Pages 364-74).  I think 
they have made a major contribution to the understanding of highly 
inclined  wellbore  stability  problems.  While  reading  the  paper, 
however,  I found  the  following  points  that,  in  my  opinion,  merit 
corrective  comments. 

First, the fracture gradient scales in Figs.  12  and  13  (Page 371) 
in units of psilft are not correct according to the numerical  values 
shown. 

Second, the equation that predicts the fracture-pressure gradient 

for  inclined  wells  (Eq.  9)  is 

Pwj('Y) =P~j+ Y3( Po -16) sin2  1', 

I suppose the authors mean that the Po  (pore pressure) value must 
be  put  in  Eq.  9  in  units  of pounds  per gallon.  If you  do  so,  say 
for a horizontal well in a normal pressure formation (9 Ibm/gal [1078 
kg/m3]),  you obtain a numerical value of -2.33. To be consistent 
with  the Pwj units  used  in  the  paper,  the  result  of Eq.  9  must  be 
in  psilft.  A  corrective  term  of  -2.33 psilft  makes  no  sense. 

Is  the Po  value  in  Ibm/gal?  If this  is  the  case,  is  there  a  con(cid:173)

version  factor  missing?  Or are  the Pwj units  in  Eq.  9  not  psi/ft? 
I  would  appreciate  the  authors  answering  these  questions. 

SI Metric Conversion Factor 

Ibm/gal  X  1.198264 

E+02 

"where sin2  I' is  in  pounds  per  gallon." 

(SPE  18596) 

SPEDE 

Authors' Reply to Discussion of Stability 
of Highly Inclined Boreholes 
B.S. Aadnoy, SPE,  Rogaland  U. 
M.E. Chenevert, SPE,  U.  of  Texas 

We  thank Simison  for  his  corrective comments.  We  will  address 
each  point. 

1.  The  fracture  gradient  scale  shown  in  Figs.  12  and  13  is  er(cid:173)

roneous.  The correct  scale  is  Ibm/gal. 

2.  The sentence after Eq.  9 shall read:  "where all pressures are 
in pounds per gallon." Any pressure unit can be used in  Eq.  9 as 
long as it is consistent. Regrettably, the unit used in Eq. 9 is Ibm/gal, 
which is not consistent with the units defined in the Nomenclature. 
As an example, look at Fig.  13. At surface, the fracture gradient 
is  about  11.3  Ibm/gal  [1354  kg/m3]  for  a  vertical  hole,  while  a 
horizontal  hole  has  a  gradient  of 9  Ibm/gal  [1078  kg/m3].  The 
difference  is  about  2.3  Ibm/gal  [276  kg/m3],  as  given  by  Eq.  9. 
In addition to the points made by Simison, three errors have been 

found in the Appendix. The first paragraph of the Appendix refers 
the derivation of the equations to Refs. 9 and  10. This is not correct; 
these particular references were taken out of the reference list during 
the  revision  process. 

In Eq.  A-2c, the two last terms are both multiplied by Poisson's 

ratio,  p,. 

The  squared term  in  the  cosine expression in  Eq.  A-3f should 

read  "cos 1'." 

We again thank Simison for his comments and hope that the above 
corrections  will  remove  any  misunderstanding  in  the  application 
of our model. 

(SPE  18736) 

SPEDE 

418 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  December  1988 

