Modeling of the Stability of Highly 
Inclined Boreholes in Anisotropic 
Rock Formations 

Bernt S. Aadnoy, SPE,  Rogaland  U. 

Summary. Simulators  have  been  developed  to  study  the  fracture  and  collapse  behavior of boreholes.  To  take  into  account  the 
directional  properties  of real  rocks,  an  anisotropic  stress  model  is  used.  The  model  takes  into  account  anisotropic  elastic  properties, 
directional  shear,  and  directional  tensile  strengths.  The  orientation  of the  borehole,  the  in-situ  stresses,  and  the  bedding  plane  can 
all  be  arbitrarily  related  to  each  other to  model  actual  field  situations.  This  paper presents  some  of the  results  of the  model.  It  is 
shown  that  neglecting  the  anisotropic  effects  introduces  an  error.  Also,  studying  the  anisotropic  model  yields  further  insight  into 
the  behavior of the  borehole. 

Introduction 
The integrity of the borehole plays an important role in many well 
operations.  During drilling, lost circulation and borehole collapse 
cause economic losses, and in production operations, controlled frac(cid:173)
turing and sand control are of utmost importance for the economy 
of an oil field.  Therefore, a better understanding of the rock mechan(cid:173)
ics  is  necessary  to  improve  the  economy  of the  well  operations. 
In the past, accurate methods to predict critical fracturing or col(cid:173)
lapse pressures have been unavailable.  Simple isotropic stress equa(cid:173)
tions  have  been  used  to  some  extent,  but  these  fail  to  take  into 
account real rock ~roperties that are clearly anisotropic.  Sedimentary 
rocks have a laminated structure, with directional elastic properties 
as  well  as  directional  shear  and  tensile  strengths.  To  understand 
field situations better, a complete mathematical model was developed 
that  takes  into  account  all  directional  properties. 

Fig.  1 gives an overview of typical borehole problems.  Shown 
are the only two cases covered in this paper-Le., borehole collapse 
at low borehole pressures and fractures initiating along the borehole 
axis at high pressures.  Our analysis is limited to  wells  > 2,000 ft 
[>6lO m]  deep. I  The model is based on linear elasticity, and ne(cid:173)
glects plastic or time-dependent effects. Fig.  1 shows the versatility 
of the simulators. The borehole, the in-situ stresses, and the rock(cid:173)
property reference frame may assume any orientation.  This gives 
us  a  tool  to  model  any  field  situation. 

Mathematical Model 
The core of the simulators is  the mathematical model for  stresses 
around boreholes in anisotropic materials. The complicated model 
is  derived  in  detail  by  Aadnoy2  and  is  based  on  a  generalized 
plane-strain concept and linear elasticity. It results in two coupled 
partial-differential equations to determine the parameters of the stress 
functions.  Aadnoy2  applies the model with a transversely  isotropic 
type of anisotropy.  This is a good description for sedimentary rocks; 
all parameters of elasticity are equal in a horizontal plane, but differ 
vertically.  The appendix briefly outlines the model.  Table 1 is taken 
from  Chenevert's3  work and  gives  a  summary  of the  elastic pa(cid:173)
rameters as applied to different rock types.  It is  observed that the 
degree of anisotropy, Kani ,  is lithology-dependent.  Therefore, the 
sandstone can be classified as very anisotropic, the shales as moder(cid:173)
ately anisotropic, and the limestone as  isotropic for this particular 
data  set. 

The two simulators, ANISFRAC for borehole fracture analysis and 
ANISCOLL for  collapse analysis,  also perform all transformations 
necessary to implement randomly oriented boreholes, in-situ stress(cid:173)
es, and bedding planes, and thus are able to model any field situation. 
The introduction of anisotropy vastly complicates the mathematics 
involved, but it is believed that it describes real field behavior better. 
From Chenevert's3  work,  a set of directional tensile-strength data 

Copyright  1988 SOCiety  of Petroleum Engineers 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

for common sedimentary rocks is also obtained. Table 2 summarizes 
these data. It is observed that the tensile strength is 20 to 35 % low(cid:173)
er parallel to the bedding  plane than  perpendicular to  it.  This,  of 
course, will affect the behavior of inclined boreholes.  Finally, the 
simulators use shear data also obtained by  Chenevert3 for the same 
rock types.  An extended Mohr-Coulomb criterion with a plane of 
weakness  is  introduced,  allowing  both the cohesive  strength  and 
the angle of internal friction  to  vary.  The results are summarized 
in  Table  3.  Note that the  limestone is  isotropic in  both its  elastic 
properties  (Table  1)  and  its  shear properties  (Table  3).  Some  of 
the resultant shear envelopes are plotted in Fig. 2. For {3= 15°  [0.26 
rad], the material is weakest because it fails along the bedding plane. 
At 0  or 90°  [0  or  1.6  rad],  it  fails  across  the  bedding plane  and 
is  therefore  strongest  for  these  directions. 

Applications in Borehole Fracturing 
The  simulator  ANISFRAC  will be used  to  study a  few  field  cases. 
The failure criteria applied are that when the least effective principal 
stress exceeds the  strength of the rock in tension,  a tensile failure 
occurs. Two different tensile strengths will be used.  One is the meas(cid:173)
ured values given in Table 2 and the other is zero tensile strength, 
assuming that the rock contains cracks that are merely reopened. 1,6 
One shale and one sandstone are studied.  The shales are generally 
almost nonpermeable but porous and contain pore fluid at a given 
pressure.  Therefore,  these  will  be modeled  with  a pore pressure 
inside the porous rock with an instantaneous rise (a step function) 
to  the  borehole  pressure  outside  the  borehole  wall. 

The shales can also be abnormally pressurized. 4  Thus, the pore 
pressure is  also a very important parameter in  shales because the 
fracture gradient is  strongly sensitive to the magnitude of the pore 
pressure. The sandstone is  somewhat different from the shales be(cid:173)
cause it is permeable.  Two different situations will be  studied.  In 
the first one, a perfect mudcake is assumed, and we have an analo(cid:173)
gous  situation  for  the  shales.  Inside  the  borehole  is  the  borehole 
pressure, and immediately inside the rock wall is the pore pressure, 
the transition being a step function.  The second situation assumes 
no mudcake; therefore, fluid communications between the formation 
and  the borehole  are allowed.  This  means  that during  fracturing 
operations, the pore pressure immediately inside the porous rock 
wall is equal to the borehole pressure. Stress contributions caused 
by  the  flowing  fluid  are  neglected. 

The results  of the calculations for the Permian shale are shown 
in Fig.  3.  The parameters used are typical for an intermediate deep 
well and are given in the figure.  The bedding plane and the in-situ 
stresses are assumed to lie in the horizontal plane.  The numerical 
values used in the following simulations are not chosen to simulate 
actual  oil  fields,  but  to  study  different  parameters. 

The hatched band defines the two limits of tensile strength.  The 
upper curve uses data from Table 2, while the bottom curve assumes 

259 

Horizontal 
Stress 

-1 

o 

a  =13 

1 

2 

3 

Normal Stress x 10", psi 

Fig.  1-Definition of the model. 

Fig.  2-Mohr's envelope for Green  River shale  and  failure 
plane vs.  bedding plane. 

A 

B 

c 

o 

Low Tan <p  High Tan <p 

Intermediate Tan <p 

TABLE  1-SUMMARY OF  ELASTIC  PARAMETERS 

Rock 
Leuders  limestone 
Arkansas  sandstone 
Green  River shale 
Permian  shale 

E·10- 6 

3.5 
2.8 
4.3 
3.5 

L 
0.22 
0.20 
0.20 
0.24 

Kanl 
0.97 
0.61 
0.84 
0.73 

TABLE 2-TENSILE  STRENGTHS  DETERMINED  BY 

THE  DIAMETRAL-COMPRESSION  METHOD 

Rock 
Arkansas  sandstone 
Green  River shale 
Permian  shale 

Tensile  Strength 
Perpendicular to 

Bedding 

(psi) 
1,698 
3,136 
2,500 

Tensile  Strength 

Parallel  to 
Bedding 

(psi) 
1,387 
1,971 
1,661 

TABLE 3-EXPERIMENTALLY DETERMINED  SHEAR  DATA 

Rock 
- -
Leuders  limestone 
Arkansas  sandstone 

Green  River  shale 

To 
(psi) 
2,500 
5,000 
5,000 
4,200 
7,250 
6,000 
8,250 
7,500 
7,500 
7,800 
7,250 

cp 

(degrees) 

35 
57.5 
57.5 
50 
41 
32 
30 
33.4 
35 
36.5 
43 

{3 

(degrees) 

All  {3 

0<{3<15 
35<{3<90 
15<{3 <35 

0 
15 
30 
45 
60 
75 
90 

---Kani =  1, p.  =  0.2 

-

-

-Kani= 0.73, p. = 0.2 

-:::; 

1/1 
Co 

2.5 

2.0 

1.5 

1.0 

0.5 

0° 

15° 

o +----r--~----~--~--~--~ 
90° 

60° 
Borehole Inclination, Y 
ox.o = 0'.0 = 0.8 psi/ft, oz.o = 1 psi/ft 
9fp = 0.465  psi/ft, Well Depth=5,000 ft,  S' = 10 

30° 

45° 

75° 

Fig.  3-Fracture gradients vs.  borehole  angle  for Permian 
shale. 

260 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering.  September  1988 

2.5,......--------------., 

_---Kani= 1, I-' = 0.2 

-Kani= 0.61, I-' = 0.2 

-

-

2.0 

0.5 

O+---------------------~ 
90° 

45° 

60° 

75° 

300 

Borehole Inclination, y 

0'.0 = 0y.o = 0.8 psi/ft, 0,.0 = 1 psi/ft 
gfp = 0.465 psi/ft, Well Depth=5J)OO  ft,  S' = 10 
Fig. 4-Fracture gradients vs. borehole angle for Arkansas 
sandstone. 

zero tensile strength. The difference in fracturing gradient between 
these two limits is large,  about 30%  for a vertical borehole.  This 
spread is less for a horizop,tal borehole because the tensile strength 
decreases with increased borehole angle.  The solid lines give the 
isotropic solution, and we see that the error is only 2 %.  It is evident 
that for this rock,  the tensile  strength is  by  far the governing pa(cid:173)
rameter,  and  the  effect  of elastic  anisotropy  is  negligible. 

Fig.  4  gives  the  results  of the  computations  for  a  similar well 
in It sandstone formation.  First, let us study the upper band, which 
corresponds  to  the  previous  case.  Here  a  perfect  mudcake  is 
assumed, which means that no pressure from the borehole is trans(cid:173)
mitted into the porous rock.  The bandwidth is  now about 20 % at 
most,  a  result of low tensile  strength.  The broken lines show the 
isotropic solution, the error now being 3 % if elastic anisotropy is 
neglected. 

The bottom band of Fig. 4 shows a very interesting effect.  Here 
it is assumed that the borehole pressure can transmit into the porous 
rock-Le., no mudcake exists.  The fracture gradient is  now low(cid:173)
ered by  more than  30 %.  This is explained by  the increased pres(cid:173)
sure of the fluids inside the pores, aiding in fracturing the borehole 
wall. However, the bandwidth is now smaller than for the case with 
mudcake.  The  effects  of the  elastic  anisotropy  are  again  over(cid:173)
shadowed by the possible variation in tensile strength and account 
for only a few percent deviation from the isotropic behavior.  Also, 
for such permeable rocks as Arkansas sandstone, the total fractur(cid:173)
ing pressure band may cover all cases shown in Fig. 4, depending 
on the quality of the mudcake. For this case, the variations in frac(cid:173)
ture gradients may  therefore be more than 43 %.  This figure  also 
explains why  shales typically have higher fracture  gradients than 
sandstones.  The shale is essentially impenneaple, while the sand(cid:173)
stone may transmit pressure from the borehole into the porous rock, 
thereby  effectively  lowering  the  fracture  pressure. 

Conclusions of the Fracturing Study. The detailed  conclusions 
from  this  analysis 2  show  that  the  effects  of anisotropic  elasticity 
parameters on tjle  fracturing  pressure are  small.  Therefore,  with 
all  possible sources of error involved  in  the  interpretation of the 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  SepteqJber  1988 

x 

z. 

----(I'"'''' 

,  ..•...........•..•.•.. ' 

..... 

y.  Y. 

~" 

Case A:  Failure at: e =  o· 
Fig.  5-Adaptatlon of core-plug  data to a real  borehole. 

Case B:  Failure at: e =  90· 

fracturing pressure, the anisotropy may be neglected. The anisotropy 
has a definite effect, however, on the position of the fracture around 
the  hole  wall. 

During back-calculation of directions and magnitudes of the in-situ 
stresses from borehole measurements,  the  anisotropic  solution  is 
required.  The  principal  strains  and  stresses  generally  will  have 
different directions  in the anisotropic  solution.  Therefore,  use of 
a simpler isotropic model may give erroneous results for the in-situ 
stresses  and  their directions. 

Permeability is an important parameter. Such impermeable rocks 
as  shales  have high  fracture  pressures.  For permeable  rocks,  the 
wellbore pressure may be transmitted into the porous rock, thereby 
lowering the fracture pressure. This explanation matches observed 
behavior  in  the  field  and  also  shows  the  importance  of a  good 
mudcake. 

The tensile strength of the rock is an important parameter in the 

fracturing situation. Because real rocks often contain cracks or frac(cid:173)
tures,  the tensile  strength may  show  considerable  variation  from 
one location to another.  Therefore, it is convenient to use two values 
for  the fracture  pressure,  one  with the tensile  strength of a good 
rock sample (which has directional variations)  and  the other with 
zero tensile strength. The band between these two points represents 
the uncertainty associated with the fracture pressure.  Note that the 
tensile strength is an absolute value, regardless of the general stress 
state. Because the general stress level increases as we drill deeper, 
the fracture band will decrease. Therefore, there is less uncertainty 
in estimating the fracture pressure for deeper wells than for  shal(cid:173)
lower wells. The most important single factor in the fracturing anal(cid:173)
ysis  is  probably  the  magnitude  of the  in-situ  stress  field. 

Appllcat.ons to Borehole·Collapse Problems 
It is difficul. to estimate the collapse pressure of an inclined borehole 
with accuracy.  If the borehole has collapsed, however, and we meas(cid:173)
ure the position of the failure, then we have a measure for the direc(cid:173)
tion  of the  least  normal  stress  on the  borehole wall. 2 

Chenevert3  provides a number of shear measurements on core 
plugs as a function of the bedding-plane orientation. These are sum(cid:173)
marized in Table 3.  For these data to be used constructively, they 
must be put into proper context.  Fig.  5 illustrates a borehole in a 
laminated  rock formation,  with  a  borehole  inclination,  1',  in  the 
x-z plane.  Two infinitesimally small pieces of rocks are shown on 
the borehole wall.  The Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion takes into 
account only the major and minor principal stresses and  neglects 
the  intermediate principal  stress. 

The  borehole  typically  will  fail  at  0 0  [0  rad]  (Case  A)  or 90 0 
[1.6 rad] (Case B), as in Fig. 5. If the applied stress in thex-direction 
is  the  smallest,  the borehole  will  fail  as  in Case  A,  and  if the y(cid:173)
direction has the  least  applied  stress,  the borehole  will  fail  as  in 
Case B.  For a  typical  collapse,  the  radial  stress  is  smallest,  fol(cid:173)
lowed by the a)!,ial stress, and the tangential stress is largest. There(cid:173)
fore,  in adapting our laboratory data, the axial stress is  neglected, 
because  the  Mohr-Coulomb  failure  criterion  neglects 
the 
intermediate principal stress.  The radial  stress is  the  minor prin(cid:173)
cipal stress,  and the tangential  (or hoop)  stress  is  the  major prin(cid:173)
cipal stress. The radial stress is always in a principal direction. The 
tangential stress is not exactly in a principal direction because some 

261 

0. 

--~ 
i Q) :c ca .. (!) 

~ 
:I 
I/) 
I/) 

~ a. 

Q) 
I/) 
0. 
.!! 
'0 
() 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

Pore Pressure: 0.435 psi/ft 

-

-Kan;= 0.84, I-' = 0.2 

-
---Kan;= 1,1-'=0.2 

Case B 

~ a. 

Q) 
I/) 
0. 
.!! 
'0 
() 

0.5 

0.4 

0. 

~ I/) 
i Q) :c 

l! 
(!) 
~ 
:I 
I/) 
I/) 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

Pore Pressure: 0.435 psi/ft 

Case B 

-Kan;= 0.61,  I-' = 0.2 

-
-Kan;= 1, I-'  =  0.2 

..... 

Case A 

O~--~--~---r--~------~ 

0° 

Borehole Inclination, y 

Case A:  0,.0 = 0.9 psi/ft, 0y.o = 1,1  psi/ft 
Case S:  0,.0;::: 1.1  psi/ft, 0y.o = 0.9 psilft 
Well Depth: 10000 ft,  0,.0 = 1.0 psi/ft,  S' = 10 

O+---~--~---+---+--~--~ 
90° 

15° 

75° 

30° 

45° 

60° 

0° 

Borehole Inclination, y 

Case A:  0,,0 = 0.8 psi/ft, 0y,O = 1.0 psilft 
Case S:  0x.o = 1.0 psi/ft, 0Y.o = 0.8 psi/ft 
Well Depth: 20000 ft,  O~O = 1.0 psi/ft, S' = 10 

Fig. 6-Collapse gradients vs. borehole angle for Green River 
shale. 

Fig.  7-Collapse gradients vs.  borehole angle for Arkansas 
sandstone. 

shear-stress components change the direction slightly.  For simplic(cid:173)
ity,  we  will  neglect this  small deviation from  the  principal direc(cid:173)
tion and assume that the major principal-stress direction coincides 
with  the  tangential  stress  direction. 

The equivalent core plugs are shown in Fig.  5.  For Case A, the 
tangential stress acts parallel to the bedding plane; therefore, /3 =0° 
[0 rad] for this case, regardless of the inclination between the bore(cid:173)
hole and the bedding plane.  It is  seen that for Case A,  one set of 
shear data applies for all borehole angles. In Case B, the tangential 
stress applies  at  an  angle  with  respect to the bedding  plane,  and 
the value is now /3=,,(.  For this case, the directional characteristics 
as a function of borehole angle with respect to the bedding planes 
apply.  The  borehole  has  at any  point a  stress  state  consisting  of 
three different principal stresses. The core plug assumes two equal 
principal stresses (the confining pressure) and one larger stress (the 
axial  load).  These two  stress  states  are  clearly  different,  but  the 
accuracy of applying core-plug data to real boreholes is not known. 
The  following  field  cases  will  illustrate  the  concept further. 

Fig. 6 gives the results of a borehole simulation located in a Green 
River  shale.  Case  A  corresponds  to  Case  A  of Fig.  5-Le., the 
smallest in-situ stress is along the x axis at 0.9 psilft [20.4 kPa/m], 
while  the  stress  is  1.1  psi/ft  [24.9  kPa/m]  along  the y  axis.  For 
this  case,  only  the  shear measurement  at  /3=0°  [0  rad]  applies, 
regardless of the borehole inclination, "(.  In Case A of Fig.  6,  the 
resultant curve is  shown.  There is  a large difference between the 
pore-pressure line and the borehole-collapse line.  This makes the 
borehole very stable because the minimum pressure seen in a real 
borehole is  usually not much lower than the pore pressure.  Also, 
this  difference  is  nearly constant with borehole angle,  which im(cid:173)
plies that for this loading situation the borehole is very stable and 
is  not  sensitive  to  the  borehole angle. 

Next,  Case B of Fig.  5 is evaluated.  The in-situ stresses along 
the x andy axes are now interchanged, with 1.1 psi/ft [24.9 kPalm] 
along the x axis and 0.9 psi/ft [20.4 kPa/m] along the y axis.  Now 
the directional  shear properties come into account.  This is shown 
in  Case B of Fig.  6.  Note that the borehole for  this  case is  more 
stable than for  Case A,  except for the region  10° <,,«25° [0.17 

262 

rad < "y < 0.44 rad].  In this region,  the  stability decreases signifi(cid:173)
cantly,  with  a  peak at "(=15°  [0.26  rad].  The  isotropic  solution 
is shown in solid lines, while the broken lines show the anisotropic 
solution. We observe that for this weakly anisotropic rock, the error 
introduced with the isotropic solution is  < 10%. This error is over(cid:173)
shadowed, however, by the effect of the directional shear strength. 
A similar analysis is conducted with the Arkansas sandstone data. 
The results  are  shown  in Fig.  7.  For this  very  anisotropic  rock, 
the  effect  of the  plane  of weakness  is  even  more  pronounced. 
Although the error introduced with the isotropic elastic solution is 
at most 25 %,  this is overshadowed by the effect of the directional 
shear strength. When the borehole pressure is lower than the pore 
pressure, there will be a flow of fluids into the borehole. A mudcake 
cannot be  formed  under  this  condition. 

Conclusions of the Collapse Analysis. If the least normal stress 
at the borehole wall is in the same plane as  the borehole axis and 
the normal axis to the bedding plane, one Mohr-Coulomb envelope 
applies for all borehole angles.  This is the least serious and the pre(cid:173)
ferred case. On the other hand,  if the least in-situ stress is normal 
to the plane of the borehole axis and the axis is normal to the bed(cid:173)
ding plane, the directional-shear-strength properties come into ac(cid:173)
count.  Now the borehole has a potential collapse problem in the 
inclination range 15° <"«  35° [0.26 rad<,,«0.6I rad]. This ap(cid:173)
plies  only to  sedimentary  rocks  with a plane  of weakness.  For a 
tectonically relaxed basin with equal horizontal in-situ stresses, this 
l\lways  applies. 

It is found that use of isotropic instead of anisotropic elastic prop(cid:173)
erties introduced an error of only  a few  percent for  such  weakly 
anisotropic  rocks  as  chalks.  For  such  strongly  anisotropic  rocks 
as  sandstones,  however,  the error was larger.  Also,  it was  found 
that pore pressure is an important parameter. Generally, the higher 
the pore pressure, the more sensitive the borehole is toward collapse. 
For such impermeable rocks as  shales,  the pore pressure may be 
considered  constant,  regardless  of the  loading. 

Also,  simulations  on  weak  rocks-e.g.,  Leuders  limestone(cid:173)

showed a  high  sensitivity  toward  borehole  collapse.  Simulations 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

Case A: 

0'0 =  1 psilft 

Horizontal Bedding Plane 

0.5 

0:'-
W 
C 
'(6 ... 
Ci)  0.4 
.!!! 
"E 
e 
~ 
is  0.3 

(Maximum Hole Diameter) 
60 0 
240 0 

150 0 
3300 
(Minimum Hole Diameter) 

-

-

- Case A 
0.2  - - CaseB 

y 

Case B: 

0,,0 = 1 psi/ft 

Inclined Bedding Plane 

0.1 

-+---+---':-'Y--x 

O-l-----..-------r-----..----I 
360 0 
Angular Borehole Position, e 

1800 

270 0 

Inclined z·Axis Normal to 
Bedding Plane 

Fig.  8-Cases for studies of borehole deformation. 

on a sandstone showed that it had a pronounced plane of weakness 
and became very sensitive toward collapse for given inclinations. 
Finally, simulations showed that collapse would occur at a slightly 
different  position  around  the  borehole  wall  for  anisotropic  vs. 
isotropic rocks.  This is  important when the principal in-situ stress 
directions  from  collapsed  holes  are  interpreted. 
Deformation of the Borehole 
In this section, we present the way borehole strain acts on changing 
borehole  pressure  to  see  whether  it  behaves  differently  under 
anisotropic  conditions.  Two  different  field  cases  are  considered. 
Both assume a vertical hole. The two horizontal in-situ stresses are 
different, 70 and 90%  of the overburden stress, respectively.  For 
simplicity, the rock is assumed to be nonporous and elasticity data 
for Arkansas sandstone from Table 1 are used as input parameters. 
The two cases  discussed are shown  in Fig.  8.  Case A assumes a 
transversely  isotropic  rock with horizontal bedding planes,  while 
Case B assumes the  same  rock type,  but  now  the axis  normal  to 
the bedding plane is oriented 30 0  [0.52 rad]  from  vertical and the 
azimuth angle of this axis is set at 60 0  [1.05 rad].  The only differ(cid:173)
ence between these two cases is the orientation of the bedding plane. 
The borehole is assumed to be drilled with a borehole pressure 
of 50% ofthe overburden stress.  During this process, the unequal 
in-situ stresses may distort the shape of the borehole, but we assume 
that the  drill  bit  acts  as  a  reamer  and  leaves  a  circular borehole 
behind, where the stress field around the hole is in equilibrium with 
the  in-situ  stresses.  At this  stage,  we have eliminated the  effects 
of the  in-situ  stresses  because of the  reaming  process.  After  the 
hole is drilled, it is assumed to be pressurized toward the overburden 
stress state,  and the deformation around the borehole wall caused 
by  this  pressure  increase  is  computed.  The  results  are  shown  in 
Fig.  9. 

Fig.  9-Differential strain  around the borehole. 

Case A with a horizontal bedding plane acts like an isotropic ma(cid:173)

terial because of complete symmetry . We see that the deformation 
is  constant  around the borehole wall.  This  is  interesting  because 
even  if the  in-situ  stresses are different,  the  strain  is  constant  in 
any direction around the wall,  and the hole remains circular.  The 
strain is  seen to depend  on the  inside  boundary  condition,  which 
for our case is a hydrostatic pressure. This is expected because the 
effects of the in-situ  stresses  were eliminated during the reaming 
process. 

Case B with  inclined bedding plane shows  strain,  which varies 
around the borehole. Note that the deformation in this case is larger, 
even with the same loading conditions. The difference between the 
maximum and minimum differential strains is about  12 %, a signifi(cid:173)
cant value. Fig. 9 shows that the borehole has a maximum diameter 
across the 8=60 and 240 0  [1.05- and 4. 19-rad] positions and a mini(cid:173)
mum diameter  across  the 8=150 and  330 0  [2.62- and  5.76-rad] 
positions around the borehole wall.  Numerical simulations showed 
that the maximum deformation  occurred at  a position that corre(cid:173)
sponds  to the  azimuth  of the  axis  normal  to  the bedding  plane(cid:173)
i.e.,  the  deformation  was  completely  independent  of the  relative 
values of the in-situ stresses, and the positions of its maximum and 
minimum values were only a function of the orientation of the bed(cid:173)
ding plane relative to the borehole. This was also expected because 
the only change has been to increase the hydrostatic borehole pres(cid:173)
sure. The preceding analysis gives some very interesting observa(cid:173)
tions.  A new technique of determining the maximum and minimum 
in-situ stresses has been developed.  An oriented core is recovered 
from a deep borehole; as soon as it reaches surface,  strain gauges 
are installed to determine changes as a function of time. The relative 
deformation is then used to calculate the in-situ stresses by assuming 
that the principal strain directions  coincide with the directions  of 
the  principal  stresses. 

Although this method reportedly measures anelastic deformation, 
the insight provided in Fig.  9 may  be used to  argue that possibly 
the  anisotropic elasticity effects also  are measured.  At this time, 
the core-recovery process is not fully understood; therefore, rather 
than drawing  any final  conclu~ions, the point here  is  to bring the 
element of anisotropy into the picture of this complex issue.  Another 
factor that is not understood is how the reaming or grinding of the 
core bit affects the release of the in-situ stresses during the coring 
process. 

SPE Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

263 

- - - - Kani = 0.97, p. = 0.22 
Kani= 0.61, p. = 0.20 

-

-

-

~----------------------~=-~ 

a) 

en 
en 

! ---CI)~ 

0.8 

'ijCL 
CL 
·u  'E 
~ 
.~ ~ 
a..~ 
... 
411 
• ~ CJ 
j 
iii  ---
0.4 

0.6 

_15° 

0°  15°  30°  45°  60°  75°  goo 

Borehole Angle, e 

Least  Effective Principal 
Stress  Gradient, psi/ft 

b) 

\ 

\ 

, 

\ 

\ 

, 
, 
, 
"- " 

-10° 

0.002 

0.001 

/ 

I 

I 

I 
./ 

./ 

./ 

_5° 

0° 

5° 

10° 

Fig. 10-Effective principal stresses around the borehole dur(cid:173)
ing fracturing. 

Direction of the Fracture on the Hole Wall 
In petroleum engineering,  borehole fracturing  operations are fre(cid:173)
quently carried out. Offshore, where most wells are inclined at high 
angles, fracturing is not performed as often as onshore. One argu(cid:173)
ment is that the fracture direction is not known offshore. If the frac(cid:173)
ture cuts across the borehole, only a small additional fluid flow path 
is created.  On the other hand,  a fracture extending parallel to the 
hole axis  will give a  significant flow  path.  The myth of fractures 
cutting across the borehole generally is  not true;  it will be shown 
why  fractures  in  inclined boreholes  >2,000 ft  [>610 m]  deepl 
are initiated parallel to the borehole axis, regardless of the inclination 
of the borehole. If a fracture cutting across the borehole should be 
observed, it is probably the result of faulting or some other geologic 
phenomenon. A numerical example will be used to show the fracture 
direction. A borehole inclination of -y=60° [1.05 rad] is arbitrarily 
chosen.  The fracture gradient is  1.09 psi/ft [24.7 kPa/m]  for both 
the isotropic Leuders limestone and the anisotropic Arkansas sand(cid:173)
stone used in the analysis. The pore-pressure gradient is 0.4 psi/ft 
[9.0 kPa/m].  Overburden stress is  set at  1.0 psilft [22.6 kPa/mJ, 
and the  horizontal  in-situ  stresses are both equal  to  80%  of this. 
The tensile strength is set to zero. For this case, the three principal 
stresses are plotted as a function of the angle around the borehole, 
as  seen  in  Fig.  lOa.  The  maximum  principal  stress  is  the  radial 
stress, the intermediate is the axial stress, and the minimum principal 
stress is the tangential stress at 8=0 0  [0 rad]. The largest effective 
principal stress is constant and equal to the borehole pressure, while 
the smallest principal stress shows quite a variation.  Because there 
is symmetry around the borehole, only 90 0  [1.6 rad]  is shown. For 
the isotropic case, the smallest effective principal stress is zero only 
at 8=0 0  [0  rad]  (and 8= 180 0  [3.14 rad]).  Outside this  region,  it 
goes into a compressive state.  For the anisotropic Arkansas sand(cid:173)
stone,  this  minimum is at 8= -50 [-0.09 rad].  It is  observed in 
Fig.  lOa  that the  principal  stresses are only  slightly  different  for 

264 

a) 

b) 

c) 

Fig.  11-Fracture pattern. 

the anisotropic and isotropic cases, but not significantly. In Fig.  lOb, 
an expanded scale is used near the minimum points.  It is observed 
that  the  only  significant  difference  between  the  anisotropic  and 
isotropic cases is that the minimum point is shifted by 50  [0.09 rad] 
around the borehole wall.  During the computations, it was observed 
that the direction of the least principal stress does not always cor(cid:173)
respond to the normal to the borehole axis.  In fact,  for  horizontal 
or vertical boreholes, the fracture would always extend along the 
borehole axis, while for inclined boreholes, a small deviation from 
the borehole axis sometimes was seen.  Inspection of Fig.  lOa,  how(cid:173)
ever, reveals that even if the fracture starts out at an angle, it may 
not extend  a long distance because the  least principal stress goes 
compressive by moving only a small angle 8 around the borehole 
wall.  Thus,  it  may  be  concluded  that the  fracture  is  confined  to 
a narrow  region and  possibly  extends  in  a zigzag form  along the 
borehole axis, as indicated in Fig.  lIb. A similar conclusion is given 
SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

by Fairhurst. 5  Possible fracture  patterns  are  seen  in  Fig.  II.  In 
Fig.  Ila, a  fracture  extending along the borehole axis  is  shown, 
as  expected,  in  vertical  or horizontal  boreholes.  Fig.  lib shows 
the expected fracture for an inclined borehole and Fig.  Ilc shows 
still  another possible  fracture  type.  Referring  again  to  Fig.  lib, 
we see that a potential shear action apparently connects each locus. 
These loci can be very short, thus giving the appearance of a contin(cid:173)
uous, but rough, surface. Therefore, contrary to earlier belief, the 
anisotropic rock model does not predict fractures cutting the hole 
at an angle.  Fig.  11  shows the fracture  direction  at  the borehole 
wall only. The fracture will orient itself normal to the least in-situ 
stress  as  it  propagates  away  from  the  borehole. 

Heterogeneous and Discontinuous Rock 
The mathematical  solution used  in this  paper is  strictly  not  valid 
for this case, but it will be used intuitively. Consider the same case 
as before, with the following modifications.  The rock has a finite 
tensile strength and contains an existing crack along the borehole 
axis located at 0 =  - 10 ° [ - O. 17 rad].  The least effective stress at 
failure is shown in Fig.  12. When the borehole-pressure is increased, 
the stress  curves  will  shift downward until the tensile  strength is 
exceeded or a weakness (a crack) reaches a critical stress state.  In 
Fig.  12, we see that the existing crack will open up at Point A when 
the least effective stress approaches the tensile strength.  Observe 
that the point of fracture no longer corresponds to the position of 
the least effective stress  and  note also  that  for  this  case,  the  two 
rocks will fracture at different stress levels, which means that they 
will fracture at different borehole pressures. From this discussion, 
the following can be deduced. Rock heterogeneity and discontinuity 
may determine the position of fracture initiation as well as the stress 
level at which fracture occurs. The stress level might be influenced 
by the degree of anisotropy of the rock.  Heterogeneities and dis(cid:173)
continuities generally reduce the accuracy of fracture-pressure and 
fracture-position  predictions. 

Application for the Petroleum Industry 
In the foregoing,  some results of simulations of a complex mathe(cid:173)
matical  model  are shown.  It is believed that this  model more ac(cid:173)
curately describes  real sedimentary rocks,  which typically have a 
laminated structure. The model shows very interesting results, but 
how can these be applied?  A  few  ideas  regarding application  are 
presented  next. 

Drilling Operations. There is a clear connection between degree 
of anisotropy and lithology,  which implies that borehole stability 
is  lithology-dependent.  Typically,  this factor has previously been 
neglected in the petroleum industry. During drilling, lost circulation 
usually occurs unexpectedly, and one explanation relates to lithol(cid:173)
ogy.  Leak -off pressures are typically taken in competent shale sec(cid:173)
tions,  while  lost  circulation often occurs  in  sandstones. 8 

Also during drilling,  a criterion for avoiding collapse (plane of 

weakness)  is given.  If a  hole has serious collapse problems,  side(cid:173)
tracking 90° [1.6 rad] to this hole direction can reduce the problems. 
Experiences  from  the  North  Sea  support this  theory. 

Production Operations. The model shows that during fracturing 
operations, the fracture will extend along the hole axis for deeper 
wells, regardless of the inclination of the borehole. This argument 
may be used to stimulate the application of hydraulic fracturing in 
offshore  wells.  In  the  past,  this  type  of well  stimulation  has  not 
been used because the direction of the fracture, across or along the 
hole, is not known. This analysis may help eliminate such arguments 
against  choosing  this  stimulation  method. 

Sand production has a  connection not only  to  shear strength of 
the rock, but also to the total stress field around the hole. A possible 
extension of the "plane-of-weakness" concept is to apply it to sand 
production. At this point, this is only speculation, but it seems log(cid:173)
ical to assume that sand production and borehole collapse are re(cid:173)
lated  phenomena. 

In Norway, borehole stability has become an important research 
area. The task is to be able not only to predict fracturing or collapse 
pressures, but to model the whole field with its stress state. There-

---Kan;= 0.97, p.  =  0.22 
__ - Kan;  = 0.61,  p. = 0.20 

0.002 

\ 

Point A, 

\  Existing Crack 

0.001 

\~) 

/ 

/ 

/ 

Borehole Angle, e 

/ 

/ 

/ 

;' 

-0.001 

Tensile St~engt~ of R~~ . _ 

. _ 

. _ 

. _ 

-0.002 

Fig.  12-Fracturlng of  rock containing a crack. 

fore,  this analysis points the way to a  more  rigorous approach in 
solving borehole problems than has been used in the past. The reader 
is also referred to Refs.  1,6, 7, and 8, which give a good overview 
of borehole  stability  problems. 

Conclusions 
A mathematical model has been developed to take into account real 
rock properties,  which  are  typically  anisotropic. 

First, fracturing of the borehole at high pressures was investigated. 
The result was that assuming  isotropic  rock properties instead of 
the real anisotropic elastic constants introduced only a small error 
in  the fracture-pressure  prediction.  More important is  the tensile 
strength of the rock. Using measured tensile strengths and zero ten(cid:173)
sile  strength (as  assumed in the field  with  cracks  present)  as  ex(cid:173)
treme limits, the fracture pressure was given in a range with maybe 
more than 50% variation between the upper and lower limits.  The 
real tensile strength is an important parameter in fracturing-pressure 
predictions.  Because the tensile strength is an absolute value,  it is 
found that the above-measured range decreases with increased well 
depth.  Therefore, there is less uncertainty associated with estimating 
fracture pressure for deeper wells if all in-situ parameters are known. 
The  position  of fracture  initiation  is  erroneous  if the  simplified 
isotropic equations are used for anisotropic rocks. Also, imperme(cid:173)
able rocks (e.g., shales) were distinguished from permeable rocks 
(e.g., sandstones). If the borehole pressure could not be transmitted 
through the mudcake or into an impermeable rock, a higher fracture 
pressure  was observed. 

Borehole  collapse  was  investigated  with  an  extended  Mohr(cid:173)
Coulomb criterion. It was found that the higher the pore pressure, 
the  more  sensitive  the borehole became to collapse.  For relaxed 
depositional basins with equal horizontal in-situ stresses, the bore(cid:173)
hole is sensitive to collapse for inclination between 10 and 35° [0.17 
and 0.61  rad].  This applies only  to laminated  rocks  with  a  plane 
of weakness. If the horizontal in-situ stresses are different, a bore(cid:173)
hole very stable against collapse can be drilled by inclining the hole 
in  the  direction  of the  least  in-situ  stress.  The  collapse  analysis 
showed that with the simplified isotropic stress equations, a signif(cid:173)
icant error is introduced for such highly anisotropic rocks as sand(cid:173)
stones.  Also,  it  was  found  that  the  least  in-situ  stress  was  not 
perfectly aligned with the direction of collapse for general anisotrop(cid:173)
ic  cases. 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

265 

The deformation pattern of the borehole was  investigated when 
the borehole pressure is  increased. If initially circular, the hole will 
deform in a circular manner if the hole  is  perfectly  normal  to the 
bedding plane (perfect symmetry).  If the angle between the bedding 
plane and the  borehole is  different from  90°  [1.6 rad],  however, 
the hole will deform elliptically. The maximum diameter of the hole 
thus obtained corresponds to the orientation of the borehole relative 
to the bedding plane. In other words, the geometry and the material 
properties, rather than the in-situ stresses, may determine the defor(cid:173)
mation pattern. These observations are valid for a time-independent 
material only and are introduced to show that anisotropy may have 
a significant effect.  For time-dependent materials, the conclusions 
may  no  longer  be  valid. 

Simulations also show that the plane-strain anisotropic model pre(cid:173)
dicts only fractures extending parallel to the borehole axis for bore(cid:173)
holes  >2,000 ft [>610 m]  deep. 1  Fractures cutting across or at 
an angle were never predicted.  For an anisotropic rock, however, 
the fracture would initiate at a different location around the borehole 
waIl compared with an isotropic rock.  Therefore, an isotropic model 
to calculate the direction of the in-situ stresses generally gives er(cid:173)
roneous  results.  Finally,  it was  deduced  that heterogeneities and 
discontinuities in the rock might be the  most important factors  in 
a  field  situation,  reducing  the  accuracy  of the  predictions. 

Knowledge of the actual in-situ stress state is probably the most 

important  element  in  all  rock-mechanics-related  work. 

Nomenclature 

a  =  constant 

aU  =  elements  of matrix of compliance 
[As]  =  matrix  of compliance  for  interpore  material 

B'  =  E;lE 
E  =  elastic  modulus  of porous  material 
Ei  =  elastic  modulus  of interpore  material 
F  =  stress  function 

gfp  =  formation  pressure gradient 
[I]  =  identity  matrix 

Kani  =  anisotropy  coefficient;  horizontal/vertical 

elasticity  ratio 

[L]  =  matrix of elastic  constants  for  porous  material 

in  rock 

x,y,z  =  reference  frame  for  borehole 

xo,yo,zo  =  reference  frame  for  virgin  in-situ  stresses 

References 
I.  Aadnoy, B.S. and Chenevert, M.E.:  "Stability of Higher Inclined Bore(cid:173)

holes,"  SPEDE (Dec.  1987)  364-74. 

2.  Aadnoy, B.S.: "Continuum Mechanics Analysis of the Stability ofIn(cid:173)
clined Boreholes in  Anisotropic Rock Formations,"  PhD thesis,  Nor(cid:173)
wegian  Inst.  of Technology,  U.  of Trondheim,  Norway  (1987). 

3.  Chenevert,  M.E.:  "The Deformation-Failure Characteristics of Lami(cid:173)

nated  Sedimentary  Rocks,"  PhD  dissertation,  U.  of Texas,  Austin 
(1964). 

4.  Potter, P.E., Maynard, J.B., and Pryor, W.A.: Sedimentology o/Shale, 

Springer  Verlag  New  York  Inc.,  New  York  City  (1984). 

5.  Fairhurst, C.:  "In-Situ Stress Determination-An Appraisal oflts Sig(cid:173)

nificance in Rock Mechanics," Proc., IntI.  Symposium on Rock Stress 
and  Rock  Stress  Measurements,  Stockholm  (Sept.  1-3,  1986)  3-17. 
6.  Bradley, W .B.:  "Failure of Inclined Boreholes,"  J.  Energy Resources 

Technology  (Dec.  1979)  232-39;  Trans.,  ASME,  101. 

7.  Cheatham,  J.B.  Jr.:  "Wellbore Stability," JPT(June  1984)  889-66. 
8.  Aadnoy, B.S. and Larsen, K.:  "Method for Fracture Gradient Prediction 
for Vertical and  Inclined Boreholes,"  paper SPE  16695  presented at 
the  1987  SPE  Annual  Technical  Conference  and  Exhibition,  Dallas, 
Sept.  27-30. 

9.  Amadei,  B.:  "Rock Anisotropy  and  the  Theory  of Stress  Measure(cid:173)

ments," Lecture Notes in Engineering,  C.A. Brebbia and S.A.  Orzag 
(eds.),  Springer  Verlag  New  York  Inc.,  New  York  City  (1983). 

10.  van  Cauvelaert,  F.:  "Coefficients of Deformation  of an  Anisotropic 
Body," J.  Engr.  Mech.  Div., Proc., ASCE (Oct.  1977) 103, No.  EMS, 
825-35. 

Appendix-Mathematical Model 
Ref.  I defines the stresses around the borehole, the transformation 
equations,  the  principal  stresses,  and  the  effective  stresses  for 
isotropic materials.  In the following,  we will look at a few  param(cid:173)
eters  that  are  different  for  anisotropic  materials. 

The  strain  components  are  related  to  the  stress  components 
through the constitutive relations of the anisotropic body as follows: 

EX 

Ey 

Ez 

'YyZ 

'Y xz 

'Yxy 

all  a12  a13  a14  a15  a16 

a21  a22  a23  a24  a25  a26 

a31  a32  a33  a34  a35  a36 

a41  a42  a43  a44  a45  a46 

a51  a52  a53  a54  a55  a56 

a61  a62  a63  a64  a65  a66 

Ux 
Uy 

Uz 
TyZ 

Txz 

Txy 

a  =  angle  between  applied  force  and  failure  plane 

during  triaxial  core  testing,  degrees  [rad] 

f3  =  angle  between  applied  force  and  bedding  plane 

during  triaxial  core  testing,  degrees  [rad] 

'Y  =  borehole  inclination  from  vertical 

................................... (A-I) 

Introducing the generalized plane-strain concept,  €z  =0, the axial 
stress  component  can  be  expressed as 

'Y xy , 'Y xz ' 'Y yz  =  shear strains 

E r  =  borehole  strain  in  the  radial  direction 

Ex,Ey,Ez  =  normal  strains 

()  =  angle  around  borehole  from  x  axis, 

degrees  [rad] 
p.  =  Poisson's  ratio 
u  =  normal  stress 

ux,uy'UZ  =  normal  stresses  in x,  y,  z  directions 
ux,o,uy,o' 

uZ,o  =  virgin  in-situ  stress  field 

iT 1 ,iT 2,iT 3  =  principal  effective  stresses 

T  =  shear  stress 

Txy,Txz,Tyz  =  shear  stresses  in x,  y,  z coordinate  system 

TO  =  cohesive  strength of rock 
q,  =  angle  of internal  friction  in  Mohr-Coulomb 

envelope,  degrees  [rad] 

'It  =  stress  function 

Subscripts 

i,j =  1,2,3 

266 

Uz =  --(a31 Ux +a32 Uy  +a34 TyZ +a35Txz +a36Txy)'  ... (A-2) 

I 

a33 

Please  observe  that  the  three  material  constants-a34'  a35,  and 
a36-may obtain  nonzero values  for  anisotropic  materials,  there(cid:173)
by coupling the normal and shear stresses.  For isotropic materials, 
this  coupling  does  not  exist. 

By introducing the following stress functions and strain compati(cid:173)

bility  conditions,  a  system  of differential  equations  results: 

a2F 
ay2 

ux= - ,  .................................... (A-3a) 

u y = - ,  .................................... (A-3b) 

a2F 
ax2 

Txy=--'  ................................... (A-3c) 

a2F 
axay 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

..................................... (A-3d) 

parameter concept of van Cauvelaert lO  is adopted, however, which 
yields for a laminated rock with the laminae oriented in the x-y plane: 

and 

iN 
Tyz = - - '  ax 

This  yields 

................................... (A-3e) 

Ex 

Ey 

Ez 

l'yz 

I'xz 

I'xy 

Kani 

E 

L4F+L 31/;=0  .................................. (A-4a) 

and 

L3F+L 21/;=0,  ................................. (A-4b) 

x 

where 

-I' 
I 

-I' 
-I'  -I' 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

-I' 
-I' 

IIKani 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

[I1Kani +(I +21')] 

0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 

[IIKani +(1 +21')] 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

2(1+1') 

x 

7 yz 

7xZ 

. .  . . . . . . . . . .  . 

.................. (A-6) 

The constitutive relations are defined in Eq.  A-6.  The three con(cid:173)
stants  are  defined  in  Table  1.  For fracturing  analysis,  a  strength 
criterion was defined  assuming either that  failure  occurred when 
the least principal stress exceeded the tensile  strength of the  rock 
or that the tensile strength was zero because of existing cracks. The 
data from  Table 2 were used  in  the  fracturing  analysis  and  were 
interpolated  for  intermediate  orientations.  For borehole-collapse 
analysis, a failure envelope was needed because collapse is defined 
as  a  shear  failure.  The  variable  cohesive  strength/variable angle 
of the internal friction Mohr-Coulomb criterion was used.  It is based 
on the plane-of-weakness theory  that says that the  rock would be 
weaker  when  it  fails  along  the  bedding  plane. 

The  Mohr-Coulomb  failure  model  is  presented  as 

T=TO+a tan  <p. 

. ............................... (A-7) 

The data from Table 3 were used in Eq.  A-7 for the collapse anal(cid:173)
ysis.  Now  some of the  most  important parameters have been de(cid:173)
fined briefly.  Because we are dealing with porous rocks containing 
fluids under pressure, an effective-stress concept must be defined. 
For  anisotropic  rocks,  the  following  effective-stress  concept  is 
applied. 

,  ....... (A-8) 

o 
o 
o 

where 

gfp  =  pore  pressure, 
[As]  =  matrix  of compliance  for  interpore material, 
[L]  =  matrix  of elastic  constants  for  porous  material  in 

rock,  and 

[J]  =  identity  matrix. 

The anisotropy may be either structural (anisotropic pore geometry) 
or intrinsic (anisotropic  solid  material)  or both.  For an  isotropic 
material,  the  product  [LHAs] =[/]. 

and 

It is readily observed that the solution depends on the elements of 
the constitutive relation matrix of Eq.  A-I.  Solved in  terms of F, 
we  are  left  with  a  sixth-order differential  equation: 

(L 4L2 -Lf)F=O. 

. .............................. (A-5) 

Inspection of Eq.  A -4 can give us some insight into the properties 
of the  solution.  If L3 =0,  the  two  stress functions,  F and  it, are 
no  longer coupled,  and  we  have  a  reduced case that  is  similar to 
an isotropic solution.  Amadei 9  defines the following conditions of 
anisotropy that correspond to the condition L3 =0: (1)  orthotropic 
material  with one plane of elastic symmetry  perpendicular to  the 
hole axis and two other planes parallel to the hole axis,  (2) trans(cid:173)
versal isotropy in a plane striking parallel to the hole axis,  (3)  trans(cid:173)
versal  isotropy  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  hole  axis,  and 
(4)  isotropy. 

From  these  equations,  it  is  deduced  that  L3 =0  only  for  a 
horizontal or vertical  hole  in  a horizontally oriented  transversely 
isotropic  rock.  For all  cases  in  between,  L3  will  not  vanish. 

Inspection  of Eq.  A-4  reveals  that  the  anisotropic  stress equa(cid:173)

tions are very complicated. Indeed, the solution to Eq. A-5 always 
gives complex or imaginary  roots.  The  resultant  stress  equations 
are  rather  lengthy;  Aadnoy2  provides  complete  expressions. 

The  model assumes that  a general  stress field  at  infinite  radius 
is  the  outer boundary  condition  and  the  borehole  pressure  is  the 
inner  boundary  condition.  Five  independent  material  constants 
generally  are  necessary  to  use  such a  model.  A simplified three-

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

267 

Numerical Simulators 
The mathematical models described in this paper were implemented 
in two numerical simulators, one for borehole fracturing,  and one 
for borehole collapse. In addition to the anisotropic stress equations, 
transformation equations were included to take into account various 
boreholes, the bedding plane,  and  in-situ  stress orientations.  The 
complete simulators have been evaluated with respect to possible 
simplifications of the equations involved.  It was found t\1at for the 
general case,  the  full  solution must be used.  Such simplifications 
as decoupling of the two differential equations in Eq. A-4 introduce 
an  error. 

SI ..,etrlc Conver.lon Factors 

degrees  x  1.745329 

ft  x  3.048* 

psi  x  6.894 757 
psi/ft  x  2.262059 

E-02 
E-Ol 
E+OO 
E+Ol 

rad 
m 
kPa 
kPa/m 

• Conversion  factor is exact. 

SPEDE 

Original SPE manuscript received for review Sept. 8, 1987: Paper accepted for publication 
Jan. 13, 1988. Revi$9d manuscript received April 18, 1988. Paper (SPE 16526) first present(cid:173)
ed  at the 1987 SPE Offshore Europe Conference held  in  Aberdeen,  Sept.  8-11. 

268 

SPE  Drilling  Engineering,  September  1988 

Discussion of Modeling of the Stability of Highly 
Inclined Boreholes in Anisotropic Rock Formations 
S.A.B. da Fontoura, SPE,  Catholic  U.  of Rio  de Janeiro,  and  H.M.R. dos Santos, SPE,  Petrobras 
Research  Center-CENPES 

Introduction 
Aadnoy  (Sept.  1988 SPEDE,  Pages 259-68) should be congratu(cid:173)
lated for his continuous effort toward the better understanding of 
deep-wellbore  stability.  We also  would like to contribute to this 
subject by commenting on some of Aadnoy's conclusions. This dis(cid:173)
cussion will provide independent data and information that may in(cid:173)
dicate that (1) the reported results from borehole fracturing are not 
sufficient to justify the conclusion that  "  ... in  the  interpretation 
of the fracturing pressure, the anisotropy may be neglected";  (2) 
the reasoning on the direction of the  fracture on the hole wall is 
not sufficient to justify the conclusion that "  ... fractures ... are in(cid:173)
itiated parallel to  the borehole axis,  regardless  of the  inclination 
of the  borehole";  and  (3)  the  use  of the  Mohr-Coulomb  failure 
criterion to evaluate the collapse gradient in the case of shale for(cid:173)
mation is not appropriate. These conclusions should be tested further 
before they  are accepted by the drilling engineering community. 

Fracturing Studle. 
To  evaluate  the  influence  of  rock  formation  anisotropy  upon 
wellbore fracturing pressure, Aadnoy selected two case studies that 
cannot be considered representative of the possible spectrum of prac(cid:173)
tical situations because the chosen Kani  values are too high and be(cid:173)
cause the  in-situ  effective horizontal  stresses  are hydrostatic. 

The Kani  values of 0.73  and 0.61, chosen to model the degree 
of rock anisotropy, may not be representative of highly anisotropic 
rocks.  Barla 1  reported  results  of Kani  as  low  as  0.2  for  some 
schists. Because few data are available for sedimentary rocks, more 
effort must be made to obtain the appropriate range of Kani  for oil(cid:173)
bearing sedimentary rock formations.  Before this range can be ac(cid:173)
curately determined, however, Kani  values smaller than those used 
by  Aadnoy  should  be  considered  to  study  the  effects  of  rock 
anisotropy. Also, in light of previous experience, it is not surprising 
that  Kani  values  of 0.61  indicated  only  a  negligible  influence of 
rock anisotropy  upon  stress distribution around a  wellbore in an 
elastic medium.  Hoek2  suggested that for Kani  values greater than 
0.33, the stress distribution is not significantly different from the 
one  obtained  for  the  isotropic  elastic  medium  (Kani = 1.0). 

The chosen in-situ state of stress is not representative of possible 
situations in the field because the horizontal stresses are hydrostatic. 
In this choice, the direction of the wellbore was made irrelevant. 
Previous experience has shown,  however,  that for  isotropic rock 
formations,  both  in-situ  stress  ratio  and  wellbore  direction  with 
respect to in-situ  stresses  may greatly  influence the  stress  distri(cid:173)
bution  around  the  wellbore  and,  consequently,  the  fracturing 
pressure. Recent papers3,4  clearly show this influence. The direc(cid:173)
tional  tensile strength of an anisotropic material may  add  to  this 
influence. 

Direction of the Fracture on the Hole Wall 
Aadnoy concluded that "  ... fractures ... are initiated parallel to the 
borehole axis,  regardless of the  inclination of the borehole," but 
we  think the example on which the author based this  conclusion 

is too particular.  This example actually represents a situation that 
can be analyzed by an isotropic model because Kani  is too high and 
because the tensile strength is zero. Aadnoy also considered a hydro(cid:173)
static condition for the in-situ effective horizontal principal stresses, 
which  added  to  the limitations  of the example. 

Aadnoy's  conclusion  is  not  in  agreement  with  the  results  of 
Daneshy5. and  of Roegiers  and  Detoumay. 4  Both  investigations 
showed that the fracture can be inclined with respect to the borehole 
axis, depending upon the geometric combination (Le., borehole in(cid:173)
clination and direction). Again, we would expect to observe an in(cid:173)
fluence  of the  rock anisotropy on the direction of the fracture on 
the borehole wall if the proper variation of the tensile strength with 
direction  is  considered. 
Borehole Collap.e Problem. 
To evaluate failure condition around a wellbore properly, a three(cid:173)
dimensional failure criterion for the rock mass should be considered. 
For the case of anisotropic rocks,  Amadei6  presented a compre-_ 
hensive criterion to consider the effect of all principal stresses upon 
the  slip condition along  the  plane of anisotropy.  It is  necessary, 
however, to calculate the direction of principal stresses around the 
wellbore.  Unfortunately,  Aadnoy  neglected  the  possible rotation 
of principal stresses in planes tangent to the wellbore,  which can 
be quite considerable. 4,5 

To apply the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, the stresses must 
be compressive.  It is  not valid to extend the  straight line  for  the 
region of tension because this may overestimate the strength of the 
material. In ~adnoy's example for impermeable shale, the drilling 
was done under highly underbalanced conditions-i.e., the internal 
mud pressure was much smaller than the pore fluid pressure, gener(cid:173)
ating a tensile radial stress.  Therefore,  for  this  case,  the stresses 
leading to failure  (tangential and radial),  as analyzed by Aadnoy, 
would lead to  an underestimation  of the  collapse  gradient. 
Reference. 
1.  Hoek, E.:  "Rankine Lecture: Strength of Rock Masses," Geotechnique 

(1983)  33,  No.3,  187-223. 

2.  Barla, G.  "Rock Anisotropy-Theory and Laboratory Testing," Rock 
Mechanics,  L.  Muller (ed.), Springer-Verlag, Udine (1974)  No.  165, 
131-65. 

3.  da Fontoura, S.A.B. and dos Santos, H.M.R.: "In-Situ Stresses, Mud 
Weight and Modes of Failure Around Oil Wells,"  Proc.,  15th Cdn. 
Rock  Mechanics  Symposium  (1988)  230-40. 

4.  Roegiers,  J.C.  and Detoumay,  E.:  "Considerations on Failure Initi(cid:173)
ation in Inclined Wellbores," Proc., 29th U.S. Rock Mechanics Sym(cid:173)
posium,  P.A.  Cundall,  R.L.  Sterling,  and  A.M.  Starfield (eds.),  U. 
of Minnesota  (1988)  461-69. 

5.  Daneshy,  A.A.:  "A Study  of Inclined  Hydraulic  Fractures,"  SPEI 

(April  1971)  61-68. 

6.  Amadei,  B.:  "Strength of a Regularly Jointed Rock  Mass  Under Bi(cid:173)
axial and Axisymmetric Loading Conditions, "  Inti.  J.  Rock Mech.  Min. 
Sci.  Geomech.  Abstr.  (1988)  25,  No.  I,  3-13. 

(SPE  19213) 

SPEDE 

SPE Drilling Engineering,  June  1989 

187 

Author's Reply to Discussion of Modeling 
of the Stability of Highly Inclined Boreholes 
in Anisotropic Rock Formations 
B.S. Aadnoy, SPE,  Rogaland  U. 

I thank da Fontoura and dos Santos for their interest in my paper 
and for their discussion.  I certainly agree that more effort must be 
spent  in  obtaining  data for  oil-bearing  sedimentary  rocks. 

Their discussion correctly points out that the degree of anisotropy 
shown in my  examples is  not extreme.  I showed that the error is 
small when anisotropy is neglected compared to uncertainties as(cid:173)
sociated with other factors,  such as  mudcake quality  and  tensile 
strength of the  rock.  With use of very low Kani  values,  my  con(cid:173)
clusion is still the same.  My data were chosen for commonly en(cid:173)
countered oilfield rocks. I also agree that the chosen in-situ stress 
states may not represent the • 'possible spectrum of practical situ(cid:173)
ations. "  I never intended my cases to cover all possible field situ(cid:173)
ations specifically. The cases were chosen to represent a common 
oil field,  mainly to study the effect of rock anisotropy.  Other sets 
of data  would,  of course,  result in different fracture  or collapse 
pressures, but I still believe that the same general trends would be 
present.  The hydrostatic in-situ  stress  state is chosen mainly  be(cid:173)
cause the principal in-situ stresses are not known.  A recently pub(cid:173)
lished  paper, 1  however,  gives  a  method  to  estimate  the 
nonhydrostatic  in-situ  stress  field  from leakoff data,  providing  a 
major improvement  in  the  modeling  of inclined  boreholes. 

In my  discussion  on  fracture  initiation,  I  pointed  out that  the 
fracture  may  initiate  at an angle to the  borehole axis,  but that  it 
is  confmed  to  extend  axially  within  a  narrow  band.  The  model 
therefore predicts a fracture that may be irregular but that will in(cid:173)
itiate along the axis of the hole as illustrated in Fig.  lib of my paper. 
Daneshy's2 experimental work seems to be in agreement with my 
model.  He,  however,  observed some deviations  at the endpoints 
of the fractures.  This observation could, in my opinion, result from 
end effects in the experimental setup.  Roegiers and Detoumay's3 
paper is a well-written discussion about fracture initiation. Again, 
I see no direct disagreement because my model predicts fractures 
that initiate at an angle to the borehole axis but that extend along 
the  hole  axis  within a  confined band.  The tangential  stress typi(cid:173)
cally  goes  tensile  only  at  narrow  regions  of the  borehole during 
fracturing, explaining the confmement within the band. As da Fon(cid:173)
toura and dos Santos correctly point out, the particular fracture shape 
(see Fig.  lIb of my paper) depends on the geometric combination 
and loading  situation. 

It is further suggested that a three-dimensional failure  criterion 
must be considered for borehole-collapse analysis. I agree that this 
would provide an interesting extension of my work.  da Fontoura 
and  dos  Santos  suggest a  criterion suitable for jointed rocks  that 

seems promising. I point out, however, that there is apparently no 
consistent view on the effect of the intermediate principal stress. 
I therefore find the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion acceptable along 
with  other  criteria.  I  agree  that  the  maximum-principal-stress 
direction deviates  somewhat from  the direction of the  tangential 
stress component. For the examples shown in the paper, this devi(cid:173)
ation was small. One of the main points was to show the effect of 
the  plane  of weakness along  the  bedding plane. 

I  also agree that extrapolating the Mohr-Coulomb envelope to 
negative stresses may introduce errors. The core plugs used to obtain 
rock strength data are typically tested without a pore pressure or 
at specific pore-pressure levels.  When these data are applied in a 
simulator, the effective stress concept is used to model the borehole 
response at any pore pressures. There is, of course, a possible source 
of error here. The validity of the effective stress principle may be 
questioned, particularly for impermeable shales. In addition, cores 
are usually not tested under in-situ temperatures.  Also,  it is often 
difficult to find  agreement between laboratory-obtained data and 
borehole response data from the field.  Here, I believe, it is not only 
a matter of accurately determining the rock properties. The deter(cid:173)
mination of the  in-situ  stress  field 1  is  more  important.  Borehole 
collapse is  much more difficult to model than fracturing,  and my 
paper  is  one step toward  full  understanding  of this  problem. 

In conclusion, I think da Fontoura and dos Santos correctly em(cid:173)

phasized the complexity of borehole mechanics with its variety of 
rock types and loading conditions.  Also, they point out that there 
are failure models other than the ones I have chosen.  Future work 
will show how these compare. Within the conditions and limitations 
given,  I still think my conclusions hold.  As  da Fontoura and dos 
Santos imply, however, borehole mechanics is an area where a lot 
of analytical  and experimental  work remains  to  be done. 

References 
1.  Aadnoy, B.S.:  "Inversion Technique to Detennine the In-Situ Stresses 
from Fracturing Data," paper SPE 18023 presented at the  1988 SPE 
Annual  Technical  Conference and  Exhibition,  Houston,  Oct.  2-5. 

2.  Daneshy,  A.A.:  "A Study  of Inclined  Hydraulic  Fractures,"  SPEl 

(April  1973)  61-68. 

3.  Roegiers,  J.C.  and Detoumay,  E.:  "Considerations on Failure Initi(cid:173)
ation in Inclined Wellbores," Proc., 29th U.S. Rock Mechanics Sym(cid:173)
posium,  P.A.  Cundall,  R.L.  Sterling,  and  A.M.  Stlirfieid  (eds.),  U. 
of Minnesota,  Minneapolis  (1988)  461-69. 

(SPE  19886) 

SPEDE 

188 

SPE Drilling  Engineering,  June  1989 

